Interviews for the position of deputy public protector largely revolved around candidates’ perceptions of public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, rather than their ability to do the job of the outgoing Kevin Malunga. Seven candidates were shortlisted by Parliament’s justice portfolio committee to take up the seven-year, nonrenewable term. They are Shadrack Nkuna, Puleng Matshelo, Moshoeshoe Moshoeshoe, Buang Jones, Lwazi Kubukeli, Noxolo Mbangeni and Kholeka Gcaleka. Malunga will vacate his office in December. Interviewees were peppered with questions about how they would get along with Mkhwebane. There has been notable acrimony between Mkhwebane and her second-in-command, who has been taken off high-profile cases. Nkuna, a former investigator at the Specialised Commercial Crimes Unit and currently a director at the Public Service Commission, said that on his first day on the job he would request a meeting with Mkhwebane to outline their relationship. “As soon as I get into the office, I will obviously have a discussion with the PP and emphasise the fundamentals of teamwork … Should I be appointed, the public protector and I will be the two most senior members of that office. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.