Democratic Alliance parliamentary leader John Steenhuisen is expected to make a clean sweep in the election for the party’s interim leader this weekend. The DA’s federal council will meet on Sunday to elect an interim federal leader and federal council chairperson following the resignation of Mmusi Maimane and Athol Trollip respectively. Initially, three candidates — Steenhuisen, DA Gauteng MPL Makashule Gana and DA Western Cape leader Bonginkosi Madikizela — accepted nominations to run for the position of interim federal leader. The party will elect a new federal leader in May next year at the DA’s next federal congress. But this week Madikizela opted to bow out of the race, saying he would rather concentrate on strengthening the party in the province ahead of the 2021 local government elections and continue his work as Western Cape transport and public works MEC. Two days after his decision to not contest the leadership race, Madikizela and Steenhuisen jointly led a march against gender-based violence in Cape Town’s Mitchells Plain. The Tafelsig ward in the area was also the site of key campaigning for a critical by-election — the first electoral test for the DA since the resignation of Maimane as party leader. Steenhuisen said his presence with Madikizela was not a show of support by Madikizela for his DA leadership campaign, but that he was there as the party’s parliamentary leader supporting an important issue. “I don’t think there is anything to read into that. Bonginkosi is the provincial leader. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.