Curating with, as opposed to on behalf of, is an approach Dr Thembinkosi Goniwe has been grappling with for the past eight years in relation to the late artist David Koloane. That is why, in conversation, one gets the palpable sense that the staging of the two shows — A Resilient Visionary: Poetic Expressions of David Koloane (at the Standard Bank Gallery) and David Koloane: Chronicles of a Resilient Visionary (at the Wits Art Museum) are more of a bittersweet moment than they are a personal triumph for the curator. The artist’s death at the age of 81, a mere 28 days after the June opening of A Resilient Visionary (at Iziko National Museum in Cape Town), doubtlessly impeded on the fullness of the curatorial vision Goniwe and Koloane had been executing behind the scenes. So, although the concurrent shows represent not only the creative legacy of Koloane by respectively foregrounding his work and his persona, they also represent the curator’s attempts at soldiering on in the wake of the towering Koloane’s demise. As a tandem, the shows actively seek to expand the framing of Koloane which often stops at the level of mentor and activist, says Goniwe, embarking on a deeper appraisal from two almost oppositional approaches. At the Standard Bank Gallery, Goniwe presents, in a thematic scheme unfolding over two floors, an artist who had mastered, or was at least conversant with many forms, namely painting, assemblage, drawing, printmaking and even animation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.