Disgraced former social development minister Bathabile Dlamini is back in public office. She’s the new chairperson of the Social Housing Regulatory Authority interim board. The surprise appointment by the minister of human settlements, water and sanitation, Lindiwe Sisulu, comes after months of speculation that Dlamini — who resigned from Parliament in June after being dropped from the Cabinet by President Cyril Ramaphosa — was to receive a diplomatic post. Dlamini, the president of the ANC Women’s League, takes control of the housing board with effect from November 1. Sisulu has made a series of new board appointments at the authority and other entities that fall under her housing and water ministries since she took office and is expected to make an announcement on their composition next week. The housing board was established in 2010 in terms of the Social Housing Act to invest in and regulate social housing for people earning between R1 500 and R15 000 a month. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.