The ANC’s attempt to take the Johannesburg metro from the Democratic Alliance and Economic Freedom Fighters coalition after the resignation of DA mayor Herman Mashaba appears to be floundering. Although the ANC initiated talks with the Inkatha Freedom Party — a partner with the coalition members — and other smaller parties on the council to support its bid for the mayorship, they appear not to have borne fruit so far. A replacement for Mashaba will be elected on November 28, the day after his final day in office. The ANC had hoped to get the IFP, which holds five seats, to back it. But these talks, which would have seen the IFP getting the mayorship of KwaZulu-Natal municipalities in return for backing the ANC in Johannesburg, have lost momentum. IFP national treasurer Narend Singh, who is head of its national team negotiating with the ANC and other parties, said he was not aware of any movement on the matter. The IFP’s Gauteng chairperson, Bonginkosi Dhlamini, said that while there had been talks with the ANC about the vote of no confidence in Mashaba, there had been “nothing” since then. “We did have discussion, but we made it clear that any agreements would be dealt with by our national leadership,” Dhlamini said. “As far as we are concerned we are still sticking to the 2016 arrangement. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.