In the past week two more fleet contracts awarded to Mcebisi Mlonzi’s company, Kwane Capital, by municipalities in the Eastern Cape have been flagged for irregularities. The multimillion rand contracts, with the Port St Johns and Mbhashe local municipalities, were entered into in 2013 and 2015 respectively. These are in addition to Kwane Capital’s contracts with the Amahlathi, Alfred Nzo and Raymond Mhlaba municipalities. In Port St Johns the contract was to assist the cash-strapped municipality to access finance to enter into a contract to buy heavy equipment. A forensic investigation report from 2016 detailed how the municipality was battling to secure funding through conventional avenues, so it put out a tender to procure the equipment. The equipment, which included two graders, a roller, a bulldozer, an excavator, a truck with a winch and a tractor with a grid roller, was to be procured through a hire purchase agreement. The contract was awarded to Mlonzi’s Laman Financial Services, which later became Kwane Capital, for a price of R31.5-million to be repaid over three years. The plan to repay the debt was for the municipality to use the plant equipment to grade roads in the municipality and then claim from the Municipal Infrastructure Grant. The investigation found that within 18 months the municipality had repaid the R31.5-million debt, but continued to pay a further R10-million over six months. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.