In his poem Notebook on the Return to the Native Land author and politician Aimé Césaire warns against the dangers of “assuming the sterile attitude of a spectator” in the face of real challenges that require urgent attention. South Africa’s sixth administration should heed Césaire’s call to not hide behind masks and avoid becoming complacent in the face of the urgent action that is required to change the country’s economic trajectory. It’s a challenging time for the ANC-led government as it seeks to stir confidence both locally and globally about South Africa’s ability to turn things around. Recent data that showed the economy has shrunk 3.2% in the first quarter of 2019 leaves much to be desired as President Cyril Ramaphosa seeks to reassure the nation and investors that the tools his government will use to carve a path of progress for the country are the correct ones to use. The sharp contraction was much higher than the 1.5% that had been predicted by economists. The Reserve Bank singled out the country’s frequent power cuts as the main contributor to South Africa’s economic woes. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.