ANC secretary general Ace Magashule is under pressure, with questions about the efficacy of his office as well as a probe into whether he and other senior leaders were complicit in setting up small parties to weaken the ANC. This marks the beginning of a move against the senior party boss. A special national executive committee (NEC) has been called next week in Cape Town in which a final report from the ANC’s integrity commission will be discussed, as well as the upcoming State of the Nation address. According to The Sunday Times, the commission report flagged “inefficiencies” in the office of the secretary general and called for a “review” of the functioning of the office described as the “engine room” of the organisation. The special NEC discussion comes on the back of an announcement by the ANC this week of an independent investigation into whether members — including Magashule and former president Jacob Zuma — helped to set up and mobilise support for smaller parties in the 2019 general election in order to weaken President Cyril Ramaphosa. It also comes after a public spat between Magashule and senior ANC leaders over his pronouncements on the mandate of the South African Reserve Bank, which hurt market sentiment and caused the rand to tumble. It is not the first time Magashule has defied the others in the ANC top six, and Ramaphosa in particular. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.