President Cyril Ramaphosa this week seemingly drew the short straw in the presidency dinner club and was despatched on the lunchtime food run. And, like most Capetonians, he turned up his nose at the well-presented meals of five-star gourmet platters and luxurious canapés. Instead, he opted for something a little more traditional: a parcel of lekker fish and chips. Ramaphosa’s motorcade rolled into Salt River, a working-class but soon-to-be gentrified suburb on the edge of Cape Town’s City Bowl. Either he called ahead, ordered on UberEats or, unbeknownst to us, this is a regular arrangement, because 20 parcels of hake and chips were ready for him. “I know you’re the best fish-and- chip shop in town,” Ramaphosa told the staff at the Palace Fisheries. I know a president could be out of touch with the common man and woman but, come on, everyone knows the best fish and chips is at Lusitania Fisheries in Cape Town’s city centre. “I prefer the hake one. But how is the snoek?” the president enquired. Good call, Mister President. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.