The Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu) has signed a wage agreement with Rustenburg-based Siyanda Bakgatla Platinum Mine, which will see miners paid a basic wage of R14 309 a month in the third year of a three-year agreement. This is substantially less than the R17 000 a month Amcu is demanding from major employers Anglo American Platinum, Impala Platinum and Sibanye-Stillwater. The agreement could lay the foundation for a looming showdown in the platinum sector ahead of the wage negotiations with other companies and unions in the industry. Amcu’s rival union, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), has rejected the agreement with Siyanda, saying its members demand an increase of 6%. NUM deputy general secretary and chief negotiator William Mabapa admits that it could face problems when it meets Siyanda later this month to renegotiate the deal, because it is the minority union at the company. “In terms of wages, it’s a take it or leave it. We have negotiated; we have reached a stage where we must declare a dispute,” he said. Amcu national treasurer Jimmy Gamasaid the union had concluded its negotiations with Siyanda earlier this year, after the company had approached workers requesting that talks be completed before its financial year-end on February 28. Gama added that the mining company has committed to backdating the wages to March, which would cost it about R34-million. But Gama denied that the deal could set a precedent for the upcoming talks between Amcu and other platinum bosses. “Every company has a method [by] which they negotiate wages. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.