President Cyril Ramaphosa has told us firmly that Eskom is too important to be allowed to fail, but ratings agency Standard & Poor’s has apparently taken a somewhat different tack, and Engineering News reported that it viewed Eskom as too big to bail. We know the utility has been teetering on the financial edge for some time now. Chief cook and Finance Minister Tito Mboweni was even required to write to Parliament ahead of the May 8 election to free up R17-billion of emergency funds so that Eskom could pay its bills. We also know that Ramaphosa tasked a technical panel to come up with a plan to rescue the over-indebted utility, which is staggering under the burden of debts amounting to R440-billion. Such a plan emerged this week — but it didn’t come from Eskom, the technical panel, the treasury or Eskom’s parent, the department of public enterprises. The plan comes from Greenpeace and is authored by Uwe Leprich, who has an impressive CV in the fields of economics, energy policy, future energy systems, decentralised power generation and climate protection. The report, Eskom: A Roadmap to Powering the Future, is subtitled The Future Role of Eskom in the Transition Process of the South African Electricity Sector. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.