The ANC is set to disband its eThekwini regional executive committee after its chairperson, Zandile Gumede, who is also the mayor of the eThekwini municipality, was arrested on corruption charges. The move follows revelations that the Hawks are planning to arrest 62 ANC councillors in the city — a number of whom are members of the executive committee — in connection with a waste disposal tender scam, which has cost the city R208-million. The arrest of Gumede and eThekwini speaker Mondli Mthembu, who is also the ANC’s deputy regional secretary, has started to negatively affect the functioning of the city council, with opposition parties on Tuesday walking out of a council housing committee meeting that Mthembu chaired. As part of their bail conditions, the two are prohibited from participating in any city council structure or meeting that may have an effect on the matter against them. The Democratic Alliance (DA) said Mthembu had violated these conditions by chairing the meeting. On the same day, the ANC’s provincial working committee met and recommended that the eThekwini regional executive committee be disbanded and replaced with a regional task team. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.