A political chess game for control of key municipalities lost by the ANC in the 2016 local government elections is slowly taking shape. The Democratic Alliance’s position in the metros and municipalities it won by a whisker is becoming increasingly perilous. Although the next local government election is just two years away, South Africa can expect shifts in government in the coming months in at least one of the metros that changed party hands in the 2016 polls. There are interesting moves afoot. The ANC’s handing of the chair of the standing committee on public accounts in the National Assembly to an opposition party is not new, but handing it to the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) opens up a world of possibilities for the governing party. The IFP is a strategic choice, given the party’s resurgence in KwaZulu-Natal and its role as a key player in the DA-led coalition in the City of Johannesburg. Its presence in the National Assembly grew from 10 to 14 seats. The IFP forms part of Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba’s executive, but his relationship with the party has been — and remains — icy at best. The IFP complained bitterly about Mashaba’s leadership style when he removed its councillor, Mzobanzi Ntuli, from the post of member of the mayoral council for housing last year. In politics, nothing is free. What the ANC receives in return for the key parliamentary post will be interesting. Then there is the thorny issue of the now fractious relationship between the DA and the United Democratic Movement (UDM), which snatched control of the Nelson Mandela Bay municipality and, working with the ANC, installed the embattled Mongameli Bobani to the helm of the key metro. Nelson Mandela Bay was the second municipality the DA ran, and subsequently lost, after the 2016 polls. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.