Could the taxman’s efforts to reduce its administrative burden by raising the filing threshold have the side effect of improving its revenues? The South African Revenue Service (Sars) says no, and that it is about easing processes for taxpayers, but it may be a double-edged sword for taxpayers in other ways, said one tax expert. Last week, during its launch of the new tax season, Sars announced that the threshold for filing tax returns had been raised for individuals. Those earning less than R500 000 are no longer required to file a tax return under certain conditions, up from the previous threshold of R350 000. The other conditions an individual must meet to avoid filing a return include: income must come from one employer; you do not receive a travel allowance, company car or other fringe benefit, which is considered an additional income; and you do not have any other forms of income such as rental from a property or income from a side business. But the group of taxpayers relieved of this burden — those earning between R350 000 and R500 000 — was granted deductions of R44-billion in 2017, according to the most recent set of tax statistics. The agency said the changes are unrelated to refunds or increasing revenue collection. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.