Vuyani Jarana’s sudden resignation from crippled SAA is being used by some as the latest proxy weapon in the governing ANC’s power battles. The Mail & Guardian has spoken to people in the various factions in the ANC who have painted a picture of a party bitterly divided. In a report that the M&G has seen, the ANC’s integrity commission has warned of the damage this disunity is doing to the party. As the newspaper has reported online and in other pages of this edition, factions are using whatever means they can, from arguments over the role of the Reserve Bank to who should control state entities, to gain an upper hand. In the past week, factions have used Jarana’s resignation and, to a lesser extent, that of Eskom head Phakamani Hadebe, as a tool in a bid to shake the powers of Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. A source went as far as to claim that discussions had started, at last weekend’s national executive committee (NEC) lekgotla, that could lead to several key state-owned enterprises (SOEs) reporting to Deputy President David Mabuza. The M&G could not establish whether the ANC has taken a resolution on the issue, despite speaking to several party leaders. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.