If you’re fed up with the doom and gloom and think that mining as an industry in South Africa is finished, you could do worse than check out the minerals sector — equity prices are up 30% this year. Mining houses have been in the doldrums, with the sector plagued by policy uncertainty, load-shedding, ongoing labour disputes, and lacklustre demand and prices. But key South African-produced minerals — platinum group metals (PGMs), iron ore and gold — are, for different reasons, back in favour. All are being boosted by a relatively weak rand caused by uncertainty about trade agreements between the United States and China and sluggish investment in emerging markets, coupled with weak economic growth. Gold was trading this week at an eight-year high, driven in part by investors seeking a safe haven as US President Donald Trump continues to wage Twitter wars on his perceived adversaries. The JSE’s gold mining index is up about 50% in the year to June 2019, versus 11% for the All share index. Platinum group metals (PGM)prices have seen the Impala Platinum share price rocket 93% over the past six months. Anglo American Platinum saw share price growth of 59% in the same period and on Monday its share price rose more than 5% after it predicted an 80% jump in earnings ahead of the release of its interim results in July. In a trading statement, the company cited the “increase in the rand PGM basket price” as the reason behind anticipated high earnings. PGM producers have seen handsome returns as the basket price of the precious metals has risen dramatically in the past year, driven in part by demand for use in catalytic converters in diesel vehicles. Kumba Iron Ore expects a 160% jump in earnings, bolstered by high iron-ore prices and a weaker rand-dollar exchange rate. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.