Mega fires, such as those that raged through the Knysna area in 2017, could become more frequent, because temperatures and the number of high and extreme fire-danger days have risen as a result of climate change, according to a new report. The report, commissioned by Santam, provides recommendations to local authorities, government and the insurance sector in a bid to prevent similar wildfires. Its findings have also brought home the growing threat that climate change poses for the insurance industry. It also comes as the Reserve Bank, which has become the country’s insurance sector regulator under the prudential authority, flagged the financial stability implications of climate change for South African insurance companies. “The effect of climate change on domestic insurers has been observed as extreme weather patterns that have increased the potential for liability claims, costing both insurers and clients more,” the Reserve Bank said in its latest financial stability review. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.