In an imperilled newspaper industry, one trade union is positioning itself as a defender of the rights of journalists in the workplace. The Information Communications and Technology Union (ICTU), a small union that has previously drawn its membership from the telecoms sector, has taken on print media giant Tiso Blackstar over salary freezes and retrenchment plans at the group. Workers, mostly journalists from the Sowetan, at the media group, which also owns the Sunday Times, Business Day, Financial Mail and Daily Dispatch, picketed outside its Johannesburg headquarters in May over salary discrepancies and bonus disputes. Last week, ICTU said in its statement that the union is “committed to go at length” to challenge retrenchments resulting from the latest round of restructuring of the Tiso Blackstar group. Commission for Conciliation, Mediation and Arbitration (CCMA) hearings into the retrenchments of more than 150 workers from various Tiso Blackstar newspapers are under way. ICTU, which is affiliated to the South African Federation of Trade Unions, has about 5 000 members, 200 of whom work at Tiso Blackstar. The union has previously boasted that it has shown Tiso Blackstar that “journalists are workers”. Thabang Mothelo, ICTU’s chief negotiator in the Tiso Blackstar matter, this week said the union views the industrial action at the group as the first step in the its plan to expand its journalist membership. “We are currently in the learning stage and we believe that, before we run, we must first crawl … because the dynamics in media are quite different,” he said. The Tiso Blackstar restructuring comes amid declining newspaper circulation figures in the sector. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.