Nomgcobo Jiba has said in court papers that the inquiry that recommended her removal as deputy national prosecutions head felt like a “political hatchet job”. Jiba was removed by President Cyril Ramaphosa after an inquiry, chaired by retired Constitutional Court Judge Yvonne Mokgoro, found that she was not fit and proper for her post at the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). Ramaphosa established the inquiry in terms of the NPA Act after Jiba had been criticised in a number of judgments in highly political court cases, and after years of rumours and allegations that she was an ally of former president Jacob Zuma. Ramaphosa’s decision to remove her may yet be reversed by Parliament, but the embattled prosecutor has urgently approached the Cape Town high court to stop the parliamentary process in its tracks — until the court has heard her application to set aside the president’s decision. In the meantime, in part A of her case, Jiba wants to be reinstated in her post “with all associated employment benefits”. In a 163-page affidavit, Jiba gunned for the president, the NPA and Mokgoro’s panel. She said the NPA and the president had bypassed the parliamentary process, which they were not entitled to do. As a consequence, she lost her employee benefits, in particular legal representation at the state’s cost. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.