The Ingonyama Trust Board (ITB) continues to bend its own rules for its chairperson by failing to take action against him for unpaid rent totalling R300 000. The ITB takes tenants who have defaulted on their lease agreements to court and evicts them, but no action has been taken against Jerome Ngwenya over the debts incurred by his service station. The amount owed by Ngwenya, a former judge, is disclosed in the ITB’s 2017/2018 annual report, which tallied the arrears on the garage, the annual rent for which is R64 876, at R281 779. Although the ITB is yet to release its annual report for 2018/2019, the arrears owed is understood to have increased because Ngwenya failed to make payments. His company, Zwelibanzi Utilities, which runs Adams Mission Service Station on Old South Coast Road, Adams Mission, was granted a short-term lease by the ITB in 2015. On the premises are the petrol station and several small businesses, including a builders’ supply store. The short-term lease was converted to a long-term one in August 2016. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.