Business Unity South Africa (Busa) president Sipho Pityana, whose prescient warning, “Wake up, the cows are being stolen,” when the state capture crowd were in the ascendancy, has given President Cyril Ramaphosa a list of what has to be fixed — and soon. Pityana, who has met Ramaphosa twice in the past couple of weeks, says runaway government debt poses the risk of “taking us all down”. Busa says the bailouts of state-owned entities, inflation-beating public sector wage increases, low growth and disappointing tax revenues are a toxic concoction, which, if not addressed through measures such as cutting spending and partial privatisation, would inevitably force the country into an International Monetary Fund (IMF) type of austerity programme. This would not have been news to Ramaphosa, who at a meeting at Nedlac last week described the economy as being in a “deep and serious crisis”. It would be nice at this time for the global economy to be purring along, but United States President Donald Trump, when not stoking the flames of white nationalism on Twitter, has been playing chicken in a trade war with the Chinese. Trump’s tariffs, which have had the effect of making Americans pay $100-billion more for Chinese goods, are an effective tax on these consumers. This is a war that he has not been winning. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.