Planning a cycle ride in Namibia, I came across the story of two German pacifists who hid in the desert for more than two years during World War II to avoid being interned in South African-controlled South West Africa. One of them, Henno Martin, wrote an account of their adventure, first published in German as Wenn es Krieg, Gehen Wir in die Wüste and in English as The Sheltering Desert.  I managed to get a copy and was enthralled, not only because this is a classic tale of survival, but by the beauty of Martin’s prose and his capturing of the rich diversity of life the desert somehow supports. This seemed to me an excellent example of immersion writing, generally traced back to writers such as David Henry Thoreau, who in Walden (1854) wrote: “I went to the woods because I wished to live deliberately, to front only the essential facts of life, and see if I could not learn what it had to teach, and not, when I came to die, discover that I had not lived. “I wanted to live deep and suck out all the marrow of life, to live so sturdily and Spartan-like as to put to rout all that was not life, to cut a broad swath and shave close, to drive life into a corner, and reduce it to its lowest terms, and, if it proved to be mean, why then to get the whole and genuine meanness of it, and publish its meanness to the world.” An example of an immersion writer from South Africa is Henry Nxumalo who, for instance, got himself employed as a labourer on a Bethal potato farm to expose the beatings and sometimes deaths of these workers. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.