In her article, “The thirtieth anniversary of the Soweto Uprisings: Reading the shadow in Sam Nzima’s iconic photograph of Hector Pieterson”, Ruth Simbao raises the question “of what happens to an emblematic image of protest as the climate of resistance shifts and as a homogenous history is conscientiously pried apart”? She goes on to show how Nzima’s iconic image of the June 16 1976 uprisings “seems to take on new meanings in its recontextualisation” and, with reference to Joel Snyder’s “Documentary without ontology” in Studies in Visual Communication, that it did not have an “unequivocal meaning to begin with”. According to Snyder, to dispense with documentary photographs as objectively representational of “facts,” has the “value of permitting us to see that our notions of document, record, objective picture and the like, are not fixed and determinate, but on the contrary are flexible, open, and changeable”. More than 40 years after Nzima’s iconic image was taken, South Africa’s relationship with it is ongoing and open-ended as it continues to reference and absorb the circumstances of the country and build in multilayered meanings. This was brought home to me in 2015 when I was invited to present my documentary film, What Happened to Mbuyisa?, at the University of Johannesburg. (The 1998 film tells the story of the mysterious disappearance of Mbuyisa Makhubu, the anguished young man carrying the dying — or already dead — Hector Pieterson in the photograph.) In my introduction to the screening, I mentioned in passing that the film had had many screenings on public television and at festivals and had been in demand, in its early years, as part of annual commemorative events of the June 16 massacre. The film, taken with these remarks in my introduction, provoked a derisive remark from an academic staff member. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.