As the department of co-operative governance tries to iron out the kinks in its Community Work Programme, the flaws in the CWP will be under scrutiny at an impending court battle. Next week the Seriti Institute — one of the two implementing agents that piloted the CWP at its inception — will take on the department in the Pretoria high court. Seriti’s court application deals with alleged irregularities in the department’s procurement of implementing agents, the nonprofit organisations paid to administer the programme in municipalities. Furthermore, an affidavit reveals that the CWP will no longer be run by the department but by a separate legal entity — a plan meant to address the flaws in the programme. The decision is part of the government’s efforts provide one million work opportunities by March 2020. The CWP was launched by the government in 2010 as part of its efforts to address poverty resulting from stubborn unemployment by offering a “safety net” to people of working age. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.