Public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane is seeking to appeal another interim interdict, this one granted to Water and Sanitation Minister Gugile Nkwinti in May. Mkhwebane announced late last month that she would be appealing the interim interdict that suspended the remedial action in her report into a “rogue unit” at the South African Revenue Service (Sars). With the focus largely on the back-and-forth over reports implicating Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan and President Cyril Ramaphosa, the Nkwinti appeal has largely flown under the radar. Usually, interim court orders are not appealable but the Constitutional Court has said it may grant leave to appeal an interim order if it is in the interests of justice. Applications to appeal interim orders can also succeed if the applicant shows that the interim order is, in fact, final in effect. In this case, the public protector has applied for leave to appeal to a full bench of the high court (comprising three judges) or to the Supreme Court of Appeal, arguing that “in reality” the case will take so long to be finally determined that it is — in effect — a final court order. The report found that, when he was land minister, Nkwinti abused his position to benefit his friend, Errol Velile Present. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.