A proposed City of Cape Town beach by-law has tongues wagging in the Mother City. The draft coastal by-law is meant to provide measures to protect coastal areas, manage access to beaches, regulate public access and discourage anti-social behaviour. But some civic organisations say it could end up policing poorer beachgoers in particular. Among other things, the draft by-law makes it an offence to “use foul or indecent language” on the city’s public beaches. The proposal also regulates the erection of “structures” on the beach, other than umbrellas and gazebos, which must not be over the size of 9m2 or “unsightly”. Also, beachgoers in areas where an admission fee is charged must produce a receipt of payment on the request of a city official. Rate-payer interest groups say certain provisions on protecting the coastal environment are welcomed. But they also describe other proposals, where human behaviour will be policed, as outrageous. “There are some pieces [of the proposed by-law] that are absolutely excellent, like issues of coastal encroachment and the protection of sensitive environmental spaces. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.