It is August 22, 2016. The Johannesburg City Hall is abuzz with activity, despite the hour and the already forgotten sunset. Economic Freedom Fighters deputy president Floyd Shivambu is front and centre in the starkly lit hall, assessing each councillor as they cast their vote for the new mayor of Johannesburg. No one predicted that the ANC’s electoral bloodletting under former president Jacob Zuma would lead to this: the party’s loss of the City of Gold, the crown jewel, the wealthiest city on the African continent. But it happened and one Herman Mashaba, businessman and newcomer to the political space, was the man of the moment, the Democratic Alliance’s mayoral candidate set to ascend to the post of executive mayor. The electorate denied the ANC an outright victory, with the party receiving only 45% of the vote to the DA’s 38%, a huge rise for the official opposition. Mashaba was the mayor who was not meant to be, but was. DA federal chairman James Selfe told the Mail & Guardian this week that he had warned three years ago that the minority government arrangement for a city the size of Johannesburg would not be easy. Three years to the day that the reluctant support of the EFF handed the Jo’burg council to the DA, the third motion of no confidence against Mashaba, the flamboyant former Black Like Me business tycoon, was brought by the ANC on Thursday. Ahead of the motion, the DA was worried. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.