South Africa is moving toward greater transparency in the murky terrain of bankrolling politics. In a week that saw the death of Gavin Watson, an ANC benefactor allegedly in exchange for lucrative state contracts, Parliament introduced a draft Bill to amend the Promotion of Access to Information Act to include provisions to get information on the funding of political parties. This week the former Free State ANC treasurer and MEC for economic development, Mxolisi Dukwana, told the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture about a R255-million “asbestos heist” using taxpayers’ money, a project directed by ANC secretary general Ace Magashule during his tenure as premier of the province. Dukwana declared that Magashule was not fit for any office and should be in jail. Businessman Igo Mpambani, a key player in the asbestos audit contract from the Free State’s department of human settlements, was shot in an apparent hit in Sandton in 2017, as detailed in Pieter-Louis Myburgh’s book, Gangster State: Unravelling Ace Magashule’s Web of Capture, about corruption and state capture in the province under Magashule. The book also tells of how funds from the dodgy asbestos tender were channelled to the ANC. The Bill, if passed, will be a game changer in that political parties will be compelled to keep detailed records of their financial dealings and open those records to public scrutiny. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.