The National Clothing Retail Federation — which includes retailers such as the Mr Price Group, Woolworths, The Foschini Group and the Edcon group — is not ruling out taking legal action over the recently signed National Credit Amendment Act. The Act, intended to provide debt relief for over-indebted consumers who earn less than R7 500 a month, has prompted consternation from bodies such as the Banking Association South Africa (Basa) but retailers could also be hard hit, according to inputs made by the treasury during the lengthy parliamentary processes hammering out the new law. Although the federation cannot yet quantify the effects the Act could have on its members, it has a number of concerns relating to it, said executive director Michael Lawrence. Among these concerns is that the law was passed without Parliament looking at a socioeconomic impact assessment study conducted by the department of trade and industry. The study was recommended by the portfolio committee on trade and industry as a means to help members of Parliament better understand the implications the law could potentially have, including on the credit market and credit providers. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.