The slowing economy has resulted in residential sales in the luxury end of the market — above R3-million — falling into deflation in suburban areas across the country. According to FNB’s second quarter property market review, which focused on Cape Town and was released a week ago, prices of houses in the affluent suburbs of the city have been declining for a year, partly because of lower demand for houses in these areas. An FNB economist said that prices in Johannesburg’s affluent areas have also declined by 2.6% over the past year. The FNB review shows that Cape Town’s estimated average house price growth in the wealthy areas softened to just 0.5% year-on-year from 1.8% in the same period last year. For example, the FNB data shows prices in the City Bowl were down by an annual 5.7% in the second quarter this year compared to a 3.7% drop in the second quarter of 2018. This decline appears to be spilling over into middle-priced areas as well. Zooming out from the rich suburbs, the picture is slightly more positive. The FNB’s Economics Weekly note shows that the nationwide house price growth ticked up marginally in July, recording 3.6% year-on-year from 3.5% year-on-year in June. Although sales in the affluent areas are lacklustre, the FNB note says this is not the case throughout the property market because activity levels differ across price segments. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.