The precautionary suspension of three key allies of former South African Revenue Services (Sars) commissioner Tom Moyane indicates that reform at the tax agency is finally taking shape. Among the first big decisions taken by newly appointed Sars commissioner Edward Kieswetter was to halt the use of his executive committee, which remained packed with Moyane loyalists, and seek advice from them only on an ad hoc basis. He also set up dedicated capacity in his office to identify matters and cases arising from the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture as well as the Sars commission of inquiry into governance and administration, chaired by retired Judge Robert Nugent. This week Sars announced the suspension of its chief officer for governance, international relations, strategy and communication, Hlengani Mathebula; its chief officer for human capital and development, Teboho Mokoena; and the group executive for employee relations, Luther Lebelo. Both Mathebula and Lebelo were criticised in the Nugent report for their conduct during the Moyane era. Mathebula was the head of enforcement at the tax agency during that period and Lebelo was dubbed “Moyane’s hitman” by his colleagues before the Nugent inquiry. Mathebula had admitted before the Nugent inquiry that Moyane had asked him to suspend key investigators at Sars without following due process. He also told the commission of inquiry of an incident in which Moyane told him to leave his cellphone behind and accompany him to the car park, where the now-axed commissioner urged him to sign off on a memorandum to empower an investigation unit. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.