The National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) has agreed to reopen inquests into the apartheid-era deaths in detention of Dr Neil Aggett and Dr Hoosen Haffejee, in the face of threats of legal action from their families. The national director of public prosecutions, Shamila Batohi, has written to the KwaZulu-Natal and Gauteng judge presidents, asking them to appoint judges to hear the two inquests, a week after she announced that the Haffejee inquest had been shelved. Batohi’s about-turn came after lawyers for the Aggett family placed her on terms for her failure to follow up on the announcement by former justice minister Michael Masutha in April that he had authorised an application by the NPA for the inquest into Aggett’s death in detention in February 1982. Lawyers for the Haffejee family, who live in Pietermaritzburg, also served Batohi with notice that they would go to court for relief should she not allow a new inquest into his death to go ahead. Aggett, a trade unionist and activist, was detained in 1981 for his involvement with the African Food and Canning Workers Union and was found dead under mysterious circumstances at the John Vorster Square Security Branch headquarters on February 2 1982. Haffejee, a dentist, died in detention at the Brighton Beach police cells on August 3 1977, 24 hours after being picked up by members of the Security Branch outside his Overport, Durban, flat. An inquest court found that the 26-year-old Haffejee had hanged himself with his jeans. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.