A war is now raging over the new road traffic law signed by President Cyril Ramaphosa last week. Amendments to the Administrative Adjudication of Road Traffic Offences Act, better known as Aarto, are being fiercely debated among critics and supporters. The latter say it will help fix the carnage on the country’s roads; the former maintain it won’t help at all and allege it is just a money collecting scheme. The new Act also brings the political hot potato of e-tolls and how the country’s roads should be funded, back to the fore. Critics warn that Gauteng motorists who pass a gantry without being accredited will be made to pay R500 and have a demerit point added to their licence. Repeat offenders risk losing their licences should they accumulate more than 12 points. A task team, headed by the transport minister, Fikile Mbalula, has until the end of the month to present its recommendations on the viability of the tolling system in Gauteng. Aarto detractors see new administration burdens with more revenue for government and increased frustration for road users. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.