Parliament’s standing committee on public accounts has a new chairperson in the Inkatha Freedom Party’s (IFP’s) Mkhuleko Hlengwa and he warns that Scopa will use its new far-reaching powers. The committee and its recommendations used to be largely ignored by parastatals and other government entities. But this year the auditor general’s new powers, which include the ability to enforce its recommendations, means it can have a telling effect on the financial health of local, provincial and national departments, state-owned entities and other bodies including Chapter 9 institutions that are allocated funds by Parliament. Speaking two months into his appointment — on the sidelines of the annual conference of the Institute of Internal Auditors of South Africa in Johannesburg this week — Hlengwa said his visit to state-owned entities reinforced what he has learned over seven years as an IFP MP: the rot is often orchestrated and protected at the top levels of these organisations. Former Pan-Africanist Congress and African Peoples’ Convention MP Themba Godi chaired Scopa for 14 years. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.