Lerato Sithole* is proud of the job she does: getting Johannesburg’s commuters to work and back home again. But when she first started driving trains for the Passenger Rail Agency of South Africa (Prasa) she wasn’t prepared for the threats she would receive from commuters fed up with the country’s ailing rail system. Amid Transport Minister Fikile Mbalula’s efforts to fix the South Africa’s trains, Sithole and her colleagues are calling for the safety of women train drivers to be put on the agenda of the minister’s recently launched “war room” at Prasa. “As a train driver, and being a woman as well, it becomes a challenge because the kind of passengers we transport — it feels to us like they believe that a woman only belongs in the kitchen,” Sithole says, her brightly painted fingernails making her hand gestures even more expressive. “When the train is faulty, it has nothing to do with you or with you being a woman: it is a mechanical fact. But they will attack you.” Sithole says Prasa’s 293 women drivers are left exposed when trains break down. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.