Five years after a commission of inquiry into policing issued recommendations on how to make the Cape Flats township safer, Lester Kiewit talks to residents about whether the situation has changed ‘Staying in Khayelitsha you learn to live with the fact that you live with guns and knives, and you will get robbed at some point,” says Andiswa Mcyiwazo, who makes the perilous journey from her home to the bus stop in the dark every weekday. It is a 15-minute walk she has to do all over again when she returns from work in the evening. Although the main roads are filled with cars and taxis, it’s the dark alleys between houses and shacks that present a danger. Mcyiwazo, who works as a data capturer for an insurance company in Tyger Valley, is just one of the many thousands of people in Cape Town’s largest township who have become victims of crime. “Where I live we do have street lights, but I have to walk past an informal settlement to get to a bus stop. They don’t have lights there,” she says. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.