Initial results from the first government bond auction after the treasury announced it would be increasing debt issuance to fund the Eskom bailout, amid other problems, were underwhelming. The auction, held on Tuesday, pointed to a decline in demand for the government’s fixed-income debt compared with the previous two months — which analysts believe could be down to the increased issuance, along with investor uncertainty about developments in the South African market, as well as globally. The bid-to-cover ratio on the benchmark R186 bond came in at 2.01, while it came in at 2.01 and 2.6 for the R2030 and the R2035 bonds, respectively — marginally lower than comparable figures for recent months according to Varushka Singh, a fixed-income and currency strategist at Rand Merchant Bank. The bid-to-cover ratio is a proxy for market demand for these instruments. The bid-to-cover ratios for these bonds in June and July has averaged between 2.5 and 4.2, she noted. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.