The final sitting of the National Assembly has set the tone for a bruising six-week battle for political parties ahead of the May 8 general elections. Farewell speeches by MPs are usually collegial, amicable and generally sentimental about the five years shared on the benches of the chamber and in parliamentary committees. There was all that on Wednesday, but the usual bonhomie was dampened by the sombre news of the suicide of ANC chief whip Jackson Mthembu’s daughter, Khwezi, and, unusually, there was some political point-scoring. Also, political party leaders were absent from the debate because it clashed with the Independent Electoral Commission’s code of conduct signing ceremony in Randburg on Wednesday. National Assembly speaker Baleka Mbete opened the farewell debate by sending condolences to Mthembu and his family. She also congratulated MPs for doing their work despite robust and sometimes violent sittings in the House. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.