There appeared to be two major takeaways from the global grandee get-together at Davos last month — 1 500 of them arrived in private jets, and a Dutch historian called out the gathering for being focused on philanthropy when the real issue is “taxes, taxes, taxes”. “The rest is bullshit,” said Rutger Bregman, author of Utopia for Realists and How We Can Get There, which wants a universal basic income and an equitable life. A clip of Bregman on a Davos panel went viral. Next was an interview with Tucker Carlson of Fox News, but the exchange quickly unravelled when Bregman told Carlson that “most of the people in Davos, but also here on this channel, have been bought by the billionaire class”. Fox media stars were millionaires bought by billionaires, paid to speak about subjects such as immigration and to stay away from the real economic issues. Carlson went into meltdown, telling Bregman in what was intended to be a pre-recorded interview: “Why don’t you go fuck yourself. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.