 Eskom is investigating irregularities that resulted in the power utility cancelling a tender process Kenya and the United States’s recent experiences highlight how outside manipulation can compromise the legitimacy of electoral processes Numsa’s general secretary says the party’s aim is to push the workers’ interest in all sectors of society. ANC leaders Sindiso Magaqa, Wandile Ngubeni and S’bu Maphumulo were assassinated The chief electoral officer’s years of experience will help ensure citizens’ choices are honoured Mozambique’s second city was destroyed by Cyclone Idai. A week on, desperate survivors attack food stores, and the mayor claims that aid is being politicised.
Beira will never be the same Climate change means that violent cyclones are likely to be Southern Africa’s new normal The nonagenarian MP is finally calling it a day and putting his faith in the precocious IFP caucus Ever since it was captured, the department’s administration has collapsed and been corrupted She laid a complaint against Intelligence Minister for failing to provide her with a declassified document required for her investigation into Gordhan. Little has changed since the Mail & Guardian’s 2005 report on how the steel giant put people’s lives at risk. Fourteen years later ArcelorMittal wants permission to keep on releasing toxic pollutants. Government interest in the pollution claims appears to have been aroused by Constitutional Court action launched against President Thabo Mbeki A new centre offers hope to families needing support for children with special needs They believe black consciousness has made a comeback and they’ll attract voters on May 8. Dr Johan Wentzel and Dr Ephraim Mabena are tied together by a common passion. The power utility claims there was no contractual basis for the payments to the consulting company. Residents are angry that commemorating the massacre has not resulted in a better life for them. The council’s climate change research could suffer from job cuts. Reality-denying United States, Brazil and Saudi Arabia join forces to stop another bid to understand the dangers of tinkering with climate. The election of Brazil’s right-wing president has let loose his followers’ queerphobia. For years, catching this drug-resistant bacteria meant painful treatment that risked your hearing and mental health. Now, that could be changing. A South African toddler died on the firm’s watch at its Lindela Repatriation Centre. Now it says it won’t release his records to his desperate parents. Ever-increasing air strikes since Donald Trump’s election are killing more and more innocent people. Fighting continues in the Central African Republic, and the thorny issue of amnesty for militants has not been clearly resolved. A superb book unravels the story of how a Senegalese court jailed a former Chad president for life for crimes against humanity, war crimes, torture and sexual violence. Corruption scandals have rocked Kenyan politics this year, implicating some of the country’s most senior officials. The domino effect of stage four power cuts this week — which stripped consumers not only of electricity, but of water and telecommunications in some areas as well — was a stark reminder of South Africa’s utter reliance on embattled power utility Eskom. There’s only one option for South Africa and that is to scrap the flailing power utility. It has taken the investigative unit almost a year to follow up on a single allegedly fraudulent transaction The ‘age of interoperability’ is based on regional collaboration — and the continent is here for it Figures released by Statistics South Africa showed that CPI increased, mainly because of the increased cost of transport and insurance. Questions about the $1.7-million finders fee arose during the executive assistant to the PIC chief executive Wellington Masekesa’s testimony. In a country desperate for solutions, the electorate is indifferent and parties are fighting themselves. A case in the equality court shows that 300 years of discrimination against South Africans of Chinese descent has not stopped. It is not just the person who drinks alcohol in excess who is harmed; the family suffers too. We all carry loads — we all have crosses to bear. The magistrate’s court circus means forgoing the poll countdown clock ceremony – but it is murder after all Ever since it was captured, the department’s administration has collapsed and been corrupted. Although the idea of a sovereign wealth fund to develop our country is a nice one in principle, it may not be the best idea we have had. A new study explores clashes between initiation, polygamy and constitutional rights. Parties have early childhood development in their election manifestos but the path to it is tricky. Copyright law should balance authors’ entitlement to reward for their labour with the needs of society to benefit from what they have written. The institution looks at how it could become an academic expression of Nelson Mandela and live out the social values he stood for.  For good vibes and an arts fix, don’t miss this. “We have someone in charge of the department who understands how best to serve the interests of their stakeholders.” The lived experience of each generation and every person expands on the official version. The eSwatini maestro who plays the smilerphone is making a comeback after years spent in Amsterdam. The menu of a new bistro in Johannesburg is a food map of tastes from across the country. Francis Fukuyama’s latest book considers dignity and recognition and the limits imposed on these. The head of a multinational chemicals group has ridden to the rescue of the cycling group. Ian Fihlani was one of the best wings of his time, but rugby politics kept him on the bench. The Bafana Bafana coach’s only option is victory, which will propel the team into the Africa Cup of Nations and secure his job. Most big international clubs now opt almost exclusively for the United States and Asia for their summer trips. The hit-and-miss coach believes his bumpy ride may be at an end after his new side bags a win.