Family and supporters of former correctional services national commissioner Vernie Petersen, who is said to have resisted Bosasa corruption, have backed a call to the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture to investigate his death, saying that it remains a mystery. Petersen, who died in February 2011, apparently of pneumonia, was lauded for his “brave anti-corruption stance in the face of death threats to himself and his family” in a statement by the #Justice4Vernie movement, which will hold a memorial in support of the former prisons head on Saturday, March 2. During the ongoing Zondo commission, former parliamentary correctional services committee chairperson Dennis Bloem described how Petersen attempted to block an allegedly corrupt food tender being awarded to Bosasa to provide meals at correctional service facilities. Bloem called for Petersen’s death to be investigated, saying: “I am having a personal plea to the commission, please investigate the death of Vernie Petersen because [he] died a mysterious death.” #Justice4Vernie spokesperson Neil Cole said that, although the family has no evidence that Petersen’s death was untoward, they still have lingering questions. “We would align with the call made by Dennis Bloem, because his death remains a mystery. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.