The government’s security cluster is working to mitigate any threat of cyberattacks to the May 8 elections. The national police spokesperson, Vish Naidoo, said crime intelligence, defence intelligence and state security were working closely with the South African Police Service (SAPS). The Electoral Commission of South Africa’s (IEC’s) systems have been increasingly digitised in recent years. IEC chief electoral officer Sy Mamabolo on Wednesday said: “Measures are being taken to ensure the integrity of our network even during the period of elections ... Threats remain every day, and threats are directed at all institutions almost on a daily basis but, for the purposes of our report to the nation, we have taken reasonable precautions to obviate the possibility.” There have been cases or allegations of cyberinterference and cyberattacks in countries such as the United States and in Africa. In South Africa, many government websites have been hacked, including those of the presidency and the SAPS. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.