Two more ANC mayors are being investigated for murder by a task team probing political killings in KwaZulu-Natal, following the arrest of Harry Gwala district municipality mayor Mluleki Ndobe this week for the murder of former ANC Youth League secretary general Sindiso Magaqa. Ndobe was number three on the ANC’s list of candidates for the province’s legislature after the elections. ANC spokesperson Gugu Simelane-Zulu said the party was “shocked and embarrassed” by the arrest of Ndobe. She said the provincial leadership would hold an executive committee meeting to discuss the matter “soon”. Also being investigated is Newcastle mayor Ntuthuko Mahlaba for the murder of former eMalahleni youth league leader Wandile Ngubeni in 2016. In a separate investigation, the task team is looking into links between eThekwini ANC chair and Durban mayor Zandile Gumede and the murder of ANC ward 88 councillor S’bu Maphumulo in September. Mahlaba, the chair of the eMalahleni region, in which Newcastle falls, was elected mayor last month, replacing Makhosini Nkosi, who resigned after receiving death threats. An impeccable source in the National Prosecuting Authority told the Mail & Guardian this week that the probe into Mahlaba — who has laid complaints with the Independent Police Investigative Directorate about the conduct of the investigators — is complete and that preparations are under way for him to make a court appearance in Newcastle within two weeks. Two other people had already been arrested for the murder of Ngubeni: Mahlaba’s bodyguards Cebo Xulu and Sibusiso Sibiya were granted bail of R2 000 in February. Sibiya was rearrested some weeks ago, along with another bodyguard, Cebo Buthelezi, in connection with the murder of ANC councillor Thembi Mbongwa. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.