The scandal of the senior SAA pilot with a forged licence has resulted in the suspension of the airline’s highest-ranking official responsible for safety after allegations that she tried to cover up for the veteran flyer. The Mail & Guardian understands that SAA’s group head for safety, Victoria Buxton, was suspended and is facing disciplinary action for allegedly attempting to conceal the indiscretion involving the disgraced William Chandler. He was found out as a result of an investigation into a reportable incident on flight SA260 travelling between OR Tambo International Airport and Frankfurt in November last year. The investigation, which includes verification of the crew’s certification, revealed the South African Civil Aviation Authority (SACAA) did not have a record of Chandler’s airline transport pilot licence (ATPL). He had submitted fraudulent documents, claiming he had one, to SAA and inspectors. The situation was immediately brought to the attention of Buxton, who investigated the incident for SAA, and it is claimed she, instead of informing SAA and taking action, alerted the South African Pilots’ Association. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.