Nomgcobo Jiba’s conduct in the litigation over the so-called spy tapes was not a “frolic of her own” but was based on legal advice to remain neutral, her former counsel, Paul Kennedy SC, told the Mokgoro inquiry. The inquiry, chaired by former Constitutional Court justice Yvonne Mokgoro, is looking into the embattled deputy national director of public prosecutions’ fitness for office. One of the issues before the inquiry is Jiba’s conduct during the “spy tapes” litigation, for which she was severely reprimanded by the Supreme Court of Appeal. Also before the inquiry is her conduct in the case brought by Freedom Under Law (FUL) to set aside the decision to drop corruption charges against the former head of crime intelligence, Richard Mdluli. The inquiry has also received another statement — far less exculpatory than Kennedy’s — from Leon Halgryn SC, Jiba’s counsel at some point in the Mdluli/FUL case. Neither Kennedy nor Halgryn offers any opinion on whether Jiba is fit for office. But their statements are significant because Kennedy’s goes against the widely held view that Jiba was Zuma’s lackey in the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.