We cannot afford to let our panic to keep the lights on overshadow the need to scrutinise our energy future, especially when we’re importing power. What South Africa needs is affordable, reliable and clean energy that drives investment, creates jobs, fosters critical skills development, helps us to curb climate change, and kicks our struggling economy into gear. The last thing we should be doing is taking uncalculated risks on mega-projects that we can’t control or manage -— as Kusile and Medupi have horrifyingly revealed with crippling cost and delivery consequences. A case in point is the Inga 3 hydro-electric power agreement that South Africa concluded with the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) in 2014: expensive and unreliable hydro power that will take at least 15 years to come online, not to mention the inevitable delays, cost overruns and corruption opportunities. But the kicker is that this imported power will cost local consumers at least R400-million more a year compared with locally producing 2 500MW of renewable energy. Late last year Energy Minister Jeff Radebe made moves to double this amount, at a further unknown total cost, and without Cabinet or parliamentary approval. South Africa is also required to invest 5% in the R200-billion project. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.