As the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal prepares to dump murder- accused mayors ahead of the May 8 poll, the national director of public prosecutions (NDPP) Shamila Batohi wants to know why Harry Gwala district mayor Mluleki Ndobe was charged with murder without evidence. On Monday, prosecutor Shohana Moodley provisionally withdrew the murder and attempted murder charges against Ndobe and against Harry Gwala municipal manager Zwelibanzi Sikhosana because there was insufficient evidence against them. This is not the first high-profile arrest to be followed by a whimpering retreat from the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) — in January, the NPA withdrew corruption charges against former president Jacob Zuma’s son Duduzane, related to the alleged bribe offered to former deputy finance minister Mcebisi Jonas. The NPA also withdrew fraud and theft charges against members of the Gupta family late last year in relation to the Estina dairy farm matter. Restoring the NPA, racked for years by political interference, will be a rocky road. Ndobe and Sikhosana were arrested in connection with the murder of former ANC Youth League secretary general Sindiso Magaqa and the attempted murder of councillors Nontsikelelo Mafu and Jabu Masiya. The two appeared in the Umzimkhulu magistrate’s court with three others to make a bail application. The shock dropping of charges sparked an investigation by Batohi. NPA communication head Bulelwa Makeke said Batohi had expressed “extreme concern” over that matter. She said Batohi had asked KwaZulu-Natal director of public prosecutions Moipone Noko why the two had been brought before the court if there was not sufficient evidence against them. “The NDPP is worried the prosecution enrolled a matter without any evidence. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.