In Eskom’s bid to keep the lights on late last year, it instructed the country’s oil company, PetroSA, to buy diesel from two companies without following proper procurement processes. But, significantly, the two companies from which PetroSA bought more than 32-million litres of diesel, European oil giant Vitol and its local empowerment partner, Vesquin, are at the centre of the controversial sale of South Africa’s crude oil emergency reserves. That 2016 sale, which has left the country without strategic oil reserves for emergencies, is the subject of a Hawks investigation after it was discovered that the Strategic Fuel Fund’s then acting chief executive, Sibusiso Gamede, flouted procurement processes in the sale. Part of the investigation involves an unexplained R20-million that was deposited in attorney Gamede’s dormant trust account at the time the deal was being negotiated and concluded. Forensic investigations into the sale of the 10-million barrels of crude at rock-bottom prices to three entities — Vitol/Vesquin, Venus Trade/Glencore and Taleveras — uncovered that Gamede was in direct talks, even negotiating prices, with the buyers on his own during the evaluation and adjudication stages of the deal. The Central Energy Fund, the mother body of PetroSA and the Strategic Fuel Fund, is in court trying to reverse the sale and stands to lose billions of rands if it has to replenish the emergency stocks at current oil prices. Vitol spokesperson Andrea Schlaepfer said the company had followed the appropriate processes when purchasing the crude oil from the fund. PetroSA spokesperson Tumoetsile Mogamisi this week defended the diesel transaction, saying the court action did not stop it from doing business with Vitol, and the transaction was in line with its emergency procurement rules. But internal PetroSA memos about the transaction, seen by the Mail & Guardian, suggest there were internal fears that the company was being compromised by Eskom’s very specific request. In this latest deal, Vesquin received close to R80-million for the diesel. In a memo dated December 12, written by Themba Joseph, PetroSA’s vice-president of trading, supply and logistics, he said the company informed Eskom that its request to purchase the diesel based on an emergency meant that they would be flouting its procurement processes and not following tender process. “Eskom is not able to trade directly with Vesquin. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.