Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane was remarkably calm this week for the leader of a reportedly fractured party whose election manifesto launch, three days before, had far less of an effect than he and his party would have liked. Responses to the party’s Manifesto for Change: One South Africa for All have, if one is to be polite, been somewhat muted. The party has also been rocked by the resignation of its policy head, Gwen Ngwenya, a month before its manifesto launch, and by the bitter battle with former Cape Town mayor Patricia de Lille, who has now set up her own party, Good. In an interview during a two-day media blitz to try to get the manifesto more traction before the provincial launches, which start on Sunday, the 38-year-old DA leader betrayed little sense of panic. South Africa, he said, was more about “sensation than substance”, a problem that affected not only the DA but all parties. Despite the initial poor response to the manifesto, the party would improve on the 22.23% it took nationally in 2014 and the 26.9% it achieved in the 2016 local government poll. The party aimed to “lead a government” in Gauteng — where it took control of the Johannesburg and Tshwane metros in 2016 — and in the Northern Cape, in addition to retaining control of the Western Cape, he said The DA is also targeting secondary areas of growth, including in the Free State, the Eastern Cape (where Maimane will address a manifesto launch on March 16) and KwaZulu-Natal, to increase its seats in the National Assembly. He downplayed the effect of ideological tensions in the DA and the loss of De Lille and other leaders during the course of 2018 on both the health of the party and its ability to improve on its showings in 2014 and 2016. “We are having debates in the party about how to address redress. That is different to trying to split a party on the basis of corruption. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.