After Crispian Olver controversially lifted the lid on graft in Nelson Mandela Bay in his 2018 book, How to Steal a City, a new book shifts the spotlight on to the other major motor hub in the Eastern Cape, Buffalo City. In City of Broken Dreams: Myth-making, Nationalism and Universities in an African Motor City, South African anthropologist Leslie Bank focuses on the historical roots of state capture and argues that the present political and economic malaise in the Buffalo City (previously East London) municipality can be traced back to the 1960s. At that time, a burgeoning, settler-dominated regional economy, driven by British capital and a paternalistic ideology of trustee liberalism, was overturned by the apartheid state. Bank links the success of the city in the mid-20th century to settler involvement in the Allied war effort and to the rise of separatist, English-speaking, white nationalism, which set itself up against the political and economic project of Afrikaner nationalism. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.