Sagarmatha was so desperate to secure a R3-billion investment from the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) that it was willing to sell its shares to the state asset manager in a side deal brokered with former chief executive Dan Matjila for nearly 80% less than what they would have cost other shareholders. This is according to PIC listed equities general manager Lebogang Molebatsi’s testimony to the Mpati commission, which is investigating impropriety at the state asset manager. Molebatsi was part of the team who worked on the Ayo Technology Solutions transaction, when the PIC controversially invested R4.3-billion in the company when it made its debut on the JSE in December 2017. Ayo and Sagarmatha are in effect controlled by Independent Media owner Iqbal Survé and both fall under Sekunjalo Investment Holdings, which is ultimately controlled by Survé through a family trust. Earlier testimony before the commission alluded to Matjila and Survé being good friends. It appears from Molebatsi’s testimony that the ink had barely dried on the Ayo transaction before Sagarmatha approached the PIC for a R3-billion investment to list on the JSE. Ayo listed on December 21 2017 after the final committee required for approval signed off on the deal a day before. On the same day as Ayo’s listing, Molebatsi received an email from the executive of listed investments, Fidelis Madavo, who said he had spoken to Sagarmatha about an initial public offering (IPO) date for the last week of January or the first week of February. “Ayo was already a difficult investment to make and so to then have a subsequent Sekunjalo-related company [with overlapping timelines] was very strange,” Molebatsi said. He was also concerned that part of Sagarmatha’s business model included using the capital it would raise to purchase Independent Media, which has a loan of about R1-billion from the PIC. “This would in effect mean that the exit of the PIC would be funded by the PIC.” Molebatsi said, had it been up to the team, Sagarmatha would not have been presented to the portfolio monitoring committee for investment approval but it was “obvious that the CEO [chief executive officer] wanted this transaction to be presented to the PMC”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.