Student leaders at the Tshwane University of Technology (TUT) are accusing the university of shunning its responsibilities by wanting students who live in back rooms to enter into lease agreements with their landlords. The university announced on Wednesday the indefinite shutdown of its campuses after student protests over meal allowances and the shortage of accommodation. It is the second shutdown in a week — TUT suspended all activities at the end of February because of protests over the same issues. President of the transitional student representative council (SRC), Dineo Hlagala, says students who are funded by the National Student Financial Aid Scheme and who live in back rooms are not getting their meal allowances because they do not have lease agreements with their landlords and therefore do not qualify for the allowances. Hlagala says the department of higher education and training put the policy in place even though it is aware of the shortage of on-campus student accommodation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.