Taking on the name Nelson Mandela means “shouldering a great responsibility”, Cyril Ramaphosa said two years ago when Nelson Mandela University dropped “Metropolitan” from its name, no longer representing the Eastern Cape city where it is located, but rather the statesman. Earlier this month, demonstrating its commitment to Mandela’s legacy, the university launched a colloquium, in partnership with the Nelson Mandela Foundation and  the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), to explore and debate how the institution could become an academic expression of Mandela and live out the social values he stood for. The colloquium was themed ‘Dalibhunga: This Time? That Mandela?’ The meaning of dali-bhunga is “convenor of the dialogue” and is a reference to the name given to Mandela after his initiation ceremony. The findings will provide the framework for how the idea of a Transdisciplinary Institute for Mandela Studies could take shape at the university, in collaboration with various partners. In her opening speech, the university’s vice-chancellor, Sibongile Muthwa, said there was a “staleness” in the higher education sector about how it approaches social justice. “All universities, it seems, are now social justice-oriented and throw around the concepts of transformation, diversity, inclusivity, decolonisation, curriculum renewal, and so on, in their ‘branding’ and ‘public relations’ exercises. “Nelson Mandela University, at this time, under our leadership, must reject this approach. Our work must be the university’s branding. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.