 Smaller political parties in the Western Cape believe they hold the key to a possible coalition government in the province after next month’s general election. No opposition party currently believes it can win an outright majority in the only province governed by the Democratic Alliance (DA). But they say there’s a strong likelihood that the DA could be brought below 50%, leaving the door open for a hung provincial legislature and the opportunity for coalition horse-trading to begin. Parties with reasonable support in parts of the province’s Boland (Cape Winelands) and Central Karoo regions say they’re capitalising on voter disgruntlement with major parties such as the ANC and the DA. The Independent Civic Organisation of South Africa (Icosa), a party that splintered from the ANC, has several councillors represented in municipalities dotted around the Boland, Karoo and Overberg regions. The party was formed after Kannaland municipality mayor Jeffrey Donson and Beaufort West politician Truman Prince were expelled from the ANC. Prince has since been welcomed back into the ANC fold and is now the Beaufort West deputy mayor. Donson, who is Icosa’s leader and a municipal councillor in the Kannaland region, says the party has seen growth in all elections since its formation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.