The country’s sugar industry remains stuck in the doldrums, thanks to a number of factors. The key challenge is a low sugar price, caused primarily by a high level of global sugar production. The industry says this has led to cheap imports and it has called for greater tariff protections in order to survive. To add to its woes, the health promotion levy (HPL) on sugar-sweetened beverages has negatively affected business, the industry claims. But experts and health activists disagree and argue that the industry is uncompetitive. The sugar price has fallen by 65% from a high of 34 United States cents a pound (R4.93 for 0.5kg) in 2010 to just 12c a pound (R1.74 for 0.5kg) in March this year, according to data firm Macrotrends, because of an increased supply by the world’s leading producers, such as Brazil, India and Australia. One local sugar giant, Tongaat, has seen a shift in its fortunes as its share price plunged by 89.2%, from R169.04 in December 2014 to R18.29 on Monday. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.