They may never be able to fill a stadium for a rock concert, but computers are making inroads into the music industry and are capable of producing songs —convincingly so — as illustrated at the South by Southwest (SXSW) festival in Texas. Already, an album featuring eight tracks has been produced entirely with artificial intelligence (AI), an unprecedented feat. I Am AI was released in September last year by YouTube star Taryn Southern, who doesn’t know how to play any instruments. “For my first music video in 2017, I had a lot of friction as a non-musician,” Southern told a SXSW panel discussion on Sunday at the festival, which is running from March 8 to 17. “I wrote lyrics, I had a melodic line but it was difficult to compose and record the actual music.” The pop artist said she began experimenting with AI two years ago, working with Amper, an artificial intelligence music composition software. “In two days, I had composed a song that I could actually feel was mine,” Southern said. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.