The increase in the consumer price inflation (CPI) has been marginal since the beginning of 2019, but rising fuel and electricity prices are likely to push up inflation in the coming months, according to analysts. Figures released by Statistics South Africa on Wednesday showed that CPI increased to 4.1% in February year on year from 4% year on year in January, mainly because of the increased cost of transport and insurance. A note by audit and advisory firm PwC stated that the cost of public transport had increased by 0.6% since January and was 8.9% more expensive than in February last year. Linked to vehicle operating expenses, the cost of insurance went up by 6.8% compared with February last year. Inflation is likely to increase gradually over the next few months, but is expected to remain below 5% for most of the year and to average slightly above the midpoint of the South African Reserve Bank’s inflation target range of between 3% to 6%. Nedbank analysts said the Reserve Bank, which is meeting next week to review interest rates, was likely to put interest rates on hold for most of the year “before resuming a mild tightening cycle in November in anticipation of higher inflation in 2020”. This is not far off from the findings of a Reuters survey released on Wednesday, which said the majority of economists approached didn’t expect the Reserve Bank to make any changes to the interest rates until the second quarter of 2020. Retail figures released on Wednesday showed a stronger-than-expected recovery. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.