The battle between public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane and some members of the Cabinet is intensifying — she has laid a criminal complaint with the police against Intelligence Minister Dipuo Letsatsi-Duba and is investigating two complaints against Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. Mkhwebane laid a complaint against Letsatsi-Duba at the Brooklyn police station on Wednesday for interfering with the functioning of her office by failing to provide her with a declassified document required for her investigation into Gordhan, based on a complaint laid by the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF). The move appears to be a retaliation for the complaint made by Letsatsi-Duba against the public protector for illegally obtaining the classified document, according to a City Press report earlier this month. The document at the heart of the fight is the report by the inspector general of intelligence, at the time Faith Radebe, that is alleged to support the narrative of a “rogue unit” at the South African Revenue Service, which was in part discredited during hearings at the Sars commission of inquiry into governance at the tax agency. The public protector’s spokesperson, Oupa Segalwe, said that, during interactions between Letsatsi-Duba and Mkhwebane, the minister had undertaken to provide a declassified version of the report but has not done so. This had prompted the move by Mkhwebane to bring charges. The EFF has insisted that the so-called rogue intelligence unit existed at Sars and that Gordhan should answer for it. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.