Former Public Investment Corporation (PIC) chief executive Dan Matjila turned the organisation inside out with his single-minded attempts to uncover “James Nogu”, the anonymous whistle-blower who accused him of corruption. Giving testimony at the commission of inquiry looking into issues of PIC impropriety, former IT executive Vuyokazi Menye described how Matjila stopped at nothing in his witch-hunt. “Hacked by our own people, our systems have been hacked by our own,” a furious Matjila told executives in a meeting shortly after the Nogu emails surfaced. In the main, Matjila was accused of corruptly providing R21-million in PIC funding to MST, a company operating mobile medical and educational units, which was linked to an alleged girlfriend. Matjila has denied a relationship with the woman. Nogu also claimed Matjila had asked a recent beneficiary of PIC funding to help the woman with R300 000. A forensic investigation by advocate Geoff Budlender found that proper processes were followed for the MST loan but Matjila had acted inappropriately when he facilitated the R300 000 payment. Matjila told Budlender that he had felt pressured to assist the woman after the former state security minister, David Mahlobo, had asked him to. Menye said corporate governance specialist Deon Botha had told Matjila that he did not think the emails were the result of a hack, although it might have appeared to be so because the person sending the emails had the information about MST. She said she also clarified in the meeting called by Matjila that the PIC’s systems do not store personal information about girlfriends and their financial problems. “I indicated that the information that was contained in the email by the looks of things appeared to come from someone who has been drinking from the same cup and eating from the same plate with Dr Dan,” Menye said. Matjila appointed forensic investigators Naledi Advisory Services to investigate the presumed leaks. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.