Unresolved disagreements, notably about ownership, are again at the centre of a looming face-off between the mining industry and government, after the Minerals Council of South Africa applied to take the 2018 mining charter on judicial review this week. Aspects of the charter, gazetted in September, remain “untenable”, the council said in its court application, even though it is seen as a vast improvement on a 2017 draft mooted by former mineral resources minister Mosebenzi Zwane. The re-emergence of tension between the industry and government comes as the economy contends with stunted growth, fears of a credit rating downgrade and the after-effects of extended rounds of load-shedding. Key provisions, which the industry argues continue to threaten its viability and are now being challenged, have remained unresolved despite ongoing discussions with the department and the mineral resources minister, Gwede Mantashe. The action by the council appears to be a last resort, said Peter Leon, partner at law firm Herbert Smith Freehills. He said the failure to resolve a number of problematic provisions in the charter undermined the minister’s undertakings to provide greater regulatory certainty to the industry. “This has been an issue hanging over the industry,” said Leon. The provisions include “onerous re-empowerment” obligations for mines on the renewal or transfer of existing mining rights. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.