The ANC in the Western Cape has launched its not-so-secret weapon in the form of President Cyril Ramaphosa to try to regain the province. This week he took to the campaign trail in the province for the first time since announcing that general elections will be held on May 8. This follows the announcement by the party in the Western Cape that it won’t be putting up a premier candidate to campaign and that the ANC president will be the face of its drive. All other political parties squaring up for this regional battle have put forward candidates with strong personal and political ties. The Democratic Alliance is punting current community safety MEC Alan Winde, the Freedom Front Plus will be fronted by political veteran Peter Marais, and the newly formed Good party is putting up former Cape Town mayor and party leader Patricia de Lille. De Lille is so familiar with particularly Cape Town voters that her party’s election poster calls simply for a vote for “Aunty Pat”. And it’s her entry into the race for the province that excites the ANC, which is currently in opposition. The party is not betting on winning the Western Cape outright but is hoping De Lille can divide the ruling DA’s support base and bring it below 50%. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.