Treat us like South Africans” was the response from those asked to step aside because of allegations of corruption and poor ethical judgement during the ANC’s list process. This is according to ANC secretary general Ace Magashule, who this week briefed the media on the process, after the party had submitted its lists of candidates for the provincial and national legislatures to the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC). Magashule said the governing party had “respected everything” in the Constitution in its vetting of candidates, but had allowed candidates to make the final call on whether they should be on the lists — except for those with criminal records. He defended the inclusion of candidates who had been implicated in state capture or corruption, among them former and current Cabinet members Malusi Gigaba, Nomvula Mokonyane, Mosebenzi Zwane and Bathabile Dlamini. “You are talking about people who have never been charged. Why do you want to single out people because they are out here in the media with allegations. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.