How will “Ramaphoria” affect the ANC’s electoral performance in KwaZulu-Natal, the stronghold of his nemesis, former president Jacob Zuma? Sihle Zikalala, who backed President Cyril Ramaphosa’s opponent at Nasrec in December 2017, believes the ANC’s message of unity has resonated in KwaZulu-Natal, enough to ensure that his party would retain a grip on the province. Despite this confident veneer, KwaZulu-Natal remains a fascinating battleground ahead of the 2019 election. The resurgence of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP), the implosion of the National Freedom Party (NFP) and the “Zuma factor” in the ANC renders it an unpredictable race for the governing party. In an interview this week after a media breakfast in Durban, Zikalala said he is convinced the party will make a strong showing, despite its drop in support to below 60% in 2016 and the internecine party conflict that led to running court battles in the province and even ongoing political killings. In the run-up to the ANC’s watershed 54th national conference a little more than a year ago, Zikalala was at the forefront of the unsuccessful campaign to elect Nkosazana Dlamini-Zuma as president of the governing party. Despite this, Zikalala has emerged not only as the chairperson of a provincial leadership elected on a “unity” slate, but also as its choice as premier candidate for the province. Although he is the front-runner for the post of premier, whispers are emerging in ANC circles in the province that Zikalala could be given a national Cabinet post after the election. Zikalala downplayed the nomination as premier candidate by the province’s branches, saying the matter was not a done deal. “I don’t have personal ambition like that. I’m a person who works. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.