Britain’s richest man, reclusive chemicals tycoon Jim Ratcliffe, emerged from the shadows on Tuesday to buy the world’s most successful cycling group, as Team Sky transforms itself into Team Ineos. In December broadcasting giant Sky announced it would end its decades-long link with Team Sky, which won eight Grand Tour cycling victories — including six Tour de France titles. Brexit-backing billionaire Ratcliffe, who has reportedly shifted his fortune to Monaco for tax reasons, will in May launch Team Ineos, named after the chemicals giant that he founded, with the hope of extending the cycling team’s global dominance. The Ineos chairman has assets worth an estimated £21-billion ($27.8-billion, €24.5-billion), placing him at the top of the 2018 Sunday Times rich list. He was only 18th on the previous year’s list but the value of his company, of which he owns 60%, soared to propel him up the ranks and earned him a knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II. It is a long way from his humble beginnings, growing up in social housing in Manchester, northwest England. Ratcliffe began a 40-year career in the business world at investment company Advent International before creating Ineos in 1998. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.