Senior ANC and alliance leaders say the politicisation of Eskom’s workforce will be a key challenge to any turnaround plan at the utility, in part because of the decision by the National Union of Metalworkers of South Africa (Numsa) to contest the 2019 election with its newly formed Socialist Revolutionary Workers’ Party. But Numsa general secretary Irvin Jim this week in an interview dismissed as “cheap propaganda” suggestions that the union’s stance on the ailing power utility is political, aimed at harming the ANC and bolstering the union’s own political party. “It is workers’ interest that we are pushing. We have to be the voice of the working class in all sectors of society,” he said. Eskom is on a collision course with unions over its plans to unbundle and because of its deals with independent power producers (IPPs). Although the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), aligned to trade union federation Cosatu, has the majority membership at Eskom, representing about 18 000 workers, Numsa has a strong presence, with about 9 000 workers, and has been decidedly vocal in its opposition to both IPPs and unbundling. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.