With mere days left on the parliamentary calendar, Parliament’s joint standing committee on intelligence has kicked the high-level panel report into abuses at the State Security Agency (SSA) into touch. The 100-page report, commissioned by President Cyril Ramaphosa, details “serious breaches of the Constitution, policy, law, regulations and directives” by former president Jacob Zuma and some members of the SSA. The report recommends an overhaul of the scope and mandate of the intelligence community, something Ramaphosa already committed to during his State of the Nation address in February, saying he would take “urgent steps” to reconstitute “a professional national intelligence capability for South Africa”. But time has all but run out for Parliament’s intelligence committee to address the findings in the report. Members of the National Assembly will be relieved of their duties from Wednesday March 20 to campaign for their political parties ahead of the general election on May 8. Committee chairperson Amos Masondo said the issue is still on the agenda of the last week of the parliamentary term. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.