A senior executive of the controversy-stricken Community Schemes Ombudsman Services (CSOS), who is accused of investing R80-million of surplus funds unlawfully in an account belonging to VBS Mutual Bank, is to face a disciplinary hearing. Themba Mabuya, formerly the CSOS chief financial officer, was suspended in August last year for financial irregularities, including for the VBS investment. Mabuya faces allegations of gross negligence, dishonesty and dereliction of duty regarding the VBS Bank transaction and for failing to provide relevant information to the board relating to other investments. A forensic investigation of the CSOS revealed that the money was deposited into an FNB corporate cheque account belonging to the now-defunct bank. From there it was allegedly siphoned off and dispersed to such an extent that “it would not even be worth mounting a legal challenge for its return”, an insider with direct knowledge said. “It was in a VBS-owned FNB account and not invested [and] that is why that R80-million is not in advocate Terry Motau’s report [on VBS, commissioned by the Reserve Bank]. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.