The former executive mayor of the Vhembe municipality in Limpopo, Florence Radzilani, who allegedly “cried” for a Christmas present from fraud-riddled VBS Mutual Bank, is claiming R38-million for defamation, loss of income and reputational damage. Radzilani, a former Limpopo ANC deputy chairperson, resigned as mayor earlier this year after that province’s premier, Stan Mathabatha, asked all executives whose municipalities deposited money with the bank to step down. Last month, she issued summons on advocate Terry Motau SC, who carried out a forensic investigation of VBS for the South African Reserve Bank, and Kabelo Matsepe, who allegedly was the middleman in soliciting municipal deposits for the now defunct bank. According to court papers filed with the high court in Pretoria by her attorney, Shoni Ravele, Radzilani said Motau defamed her in his report, The Great Bank Heist, and created the impression that she was of “base moral standard, dishonest, not worthy of holding public office and unable to deliver as an executive mayor”. In his report, Motau said “one of the most illuminating examples of the rampant corruption and bribery that occurred is to be found in a WhatsApp discussion between Matsepe [and former VBS chairperson Tshifhiwa] Matodzi on 20 December 2017”. The discussion was about gratuities. Matsepe handed over his cellphone to Motau’s investigators. “The mayor of Vhembe is crying she says we must give her and the speaker a Christmas because they are the ones who are making sure we keep that money for six months. We gave her 300k and she cried and said we gave juniors R1.5-million and we gave her 300k … we said we will consult with you and will sort her out Friday morning … if we can let’s give her 1% on a level of trust because she did keep her promise that she will block the money from being withdrawn,” said Matsepe in a WhatsApp to Matodzi, according to the report. He replied: “Go ahead … But she must know the formula.” The Vhembe municipality lost R300-million deposited in VBS. In her court papers, Radzilani argued that Motau’s reference to the WhatsApp messages, without giving her an opportunity to present her side of the story, was intended to defame her and cause her reputational and financial prejudice. “In publishing the aforesaid paragraphs concerning the plaintiff [Radzilani], the first [Motau] and second [Reserve Bank] defendants were reckless in that they did not care whether the contents of the said WhatsApp messages were true or false; took no reasonable step to establish and/or to investigate the truth of the allegations contained in the said WhatsApp messages. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.