Government appears to have cut the Ingonyama Trust Board loose, choosing not to join the ITB’s defence of a court challenge to its authority to issue leases to residents of the 2.8-million hectares of land it administers on behalf of King Goodwill Zwelithini. The national department of rural development and land affairs was a co-respondent with the board in a high court application by the Rural Women’s Movement, the Council for the Advancement of the Constitution and seven trust land residents to have the lease programme scrapped. The department, the board, the KwaZulu-Natal co-operative governance and traditional affairs department and the KwaZulu-Natal house of traditional leaders had until Thursday (February 28) to file their defence to the application, which was brought in November last year. After the high-level panel, which had been tasked with assessing key legislation, recommended that the ITB be scrapped, President Cyril Ramaphosa and the KwaZulu-Natal provincial government last year went out of their way to reassure Zwelithini that their administrations would not attempt to undermine the board’s control over land in the province. The panel’s recommendations and heavy scrutiny applied to the board’s leadership and its financial management by Parliament sparked threats of legal action and mass mobilisation ahead of the elections by Zwelithini and the province’s chiefs. The tensions were further heightened by Parliament’s hearings on changing the Constitution to allow for land expropriation without compensation, which Zwelithini and traditional leaders feared may be used to target land under their control. Thabiso Mbhense, of the Legal Resources Centre which is representing the applicants, said the LRC had been informed that the national rural development department would file an affidavit outlining its reasons for not opposing the matter. The KwaZulu-Natal co-operative governance and traditional affairs department would also not oppose the application. “This is significant,” said Mbhense. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.