Allegations of a “rogue unit” at the South African Revenue Service (Sars) have been resurrected by the Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) on a number of platforms as a weapon in the opposition party’s war on Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. The rogue unit keeps coming up — in the fight between Gordhan and EFF leaders before the equality court, in a complaint to the public protector by the EFF and even in the EFF’s rejection of newly appointed Sars commissioner Edward Kieswetter this week. Although the appointment was generally welcomed, the EFF said the process to appoint him was “patently nepotistic and corrupt” and questioned his proximity to Trevor Manuel, who chaired the panel that interviewed candidates for the post. The Sars Act says that the responsibility to appoint a Sars commissioner rests with the president, and it does not prescribe a process. The EFF said it also opposed Kieswetter’s appointment because he was a deputy commissioner under Gordhan when the alleged “rogue unit” was formed. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.