At least nine cases related to domestic violence were withdrawn in the Johannesburg magistrate’s court in February, according to Pumeza Futshane, the chief state prosecutor in the office of the director of public prosecutions, South Gauteng. “This is a major crisis not only because, as the NPA [National Prosecuting Authority], we get a tongue-lashing when cases are withdrawn, but because women keep going back to men who will one day kill them. “We get reasons like ‘he is the father of my children’, ‘there is no food’, or that they have spoken and resolved the issue,” she said. It is not the only court experiencing a high volume of cases being withdrawn. The prosecutors at the Hillbrow magistrate’s court also have scary stories to tell, such as how a few months ago a pregnant woman opened a case of assault after she had been beaten by her boyfriend but how a few days later she was back to withdraw the case. “I told her I would not drop the case because he would kill her next time, so I pushed on with it and the magistrate acquitted the man due to insufficient evidence because she was not willing to testify,” said a prosecutor at the court. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.