Harvest of Thorns by Shimmer Chinodya, by Weaver Press (2017)  Shimmer Chinodya’s Harvest of Thorns won the 1990 Commonwealth Writers’ Prize: Best Book (Africa Region). I first read the book as an O level literature setwork book and I remember, even then, getting the feeling that it went somewhat against the grain of the national war narrative played out on the state broadcaster’s programmes, our history syllabus and the gaudy Heroes’ and Independence Day celebrations. Despite the prominence of Dambudzo Marechera and Tsitsi Dangarembga in world literature at the time, the different trajectories of critical singers, at least when compared with the writers, speak to the accessibility and mass appeal of music over literature. Weaver Press has recently republished Harvest of Thorns, providing a lens through which to view the last 60 years of Zimbabwean history. In the novel, Benjamin Tichafa returns from the war in 1980 a war-toughened young man with unkempt hair, striding in his big brown boots. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.