When National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) administrator Dr Randall Carolissen walked into the job six months ago, he found an organisation with an IT system that crashed every night, staff who approved student payments from their homes and no governing policies. Carolissen, a group executive of tax analysis at the South African Revenue Service (Sars), was roped in by Minister of Higher Education and Training Naledi Pandor in August 2018 to assist the troubled scheme after it had failed to pay student allowances for eight months, leading to numerous protests from university and college students. They had gone for many months without food and book allowances, their accommodation was not paid and others hadn’t received their transport allowances. In short, they were angry. Among other things, Carolissen had to ensure that students were paid their outstanding allowances, oversee the opening of applications for this year and address the scheme’s operational challenges. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.