Slow economic growth is throttling the development of small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and lending by the major banks to black-owned small businesses shrank by 7.7% between 2016 and 2017, according to figures from the Banking Association South Africa (Basa). Alongside issues such as the level of black ownership of banks, the lack of funding for small black-owned business is often cited as a stumbling block to transforming the sector and the wider economy. Basa officials say sluggish economic growth has meant the number of SMEs is not increasing, and many of them need significant nonfinancial support and forms of investment other than debt financing by banks to develop. Lending to SMEs has remained a problem and their number has stagnated for the past 10 years, Basa’s head of financial inclusion, Khulekani Mathe, says. “The pipeline of new SMEs coming in is pretty much broken. And that talks about the whole ecosystem to support small and medium enterprises that … is not allowing new organisation to come in, grow and become successful.” Small businesses also face nonfinancial difficulties, according to Basa managing director Cas Coovadia, such as labour legislation. “It’s not what you pay workers; it’s the ease or difficulty of hiring or firing people,” he says. South Africa’s venture capital market for SMEs is also undeveloped, he says.  “Banks do debt finance; they don’t do venture capital finance and no business, let alone an SME, can survive on debt finance alone,” he adds. Mathe says about 75% of the funding for SMEs comes from the banks, which is not ideal. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.