Tymebank, the new kid on the banking block, is pitching its fees so low that one wonders how it will make money. For instance, it does not charge for withdrawals and incumbent banks charge between R2.50 and R6.50 for this service. Its chief executive, Sandile Shabalala, claims Tymebank is “50% cheaper than any bank out there”. Owned by African Rainbow Capital (ARC), a company in Patrice Motsepe’s Ubuntu-Botho Investments stable, the bank aims to disrupt the sector by offering cheaper banking combined with the use of data analytics and customer education to build up its base. It says it is targeting the underbanked. Tymebank had its official launch this week, after a soft launch last November. The bank appears to be getting customers; it says it has already notched up 80 000 and took R10-million in deposits on a single day this week. Tymebank compares its costs with other banks based on Solidarity’s 2018 banking report, which  compares a bundle of 17 transactions. Tymebank was not in operation when the report was done. It says its fees are the cheapest at R32. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.