South Africa’s law enforcement authorities have again been lambasted for their failure to move on the investigation into retailer Steinhoff, after a dismal showing in Parliament on Tuesday. Steinhoff chairperson Heather Sonn and chief executive Louis du Preez faced a joint sitting of the standing committees on finance, public accounts, trade and industry, and public service and administration in a briefing that included various financial regulators, the Hawks and the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA). It followed last Friday’s release of a sparse overview of the forensic investigation into alleged accounting fraud at Steinhoff, done by auditing firm PwC. The overview revealed that fictitious and irregular transactions over several years had inflated the company’s profits and assets by more than €6.5-billion (R100-billion). The Hawks’ Lieutenant General Godfrey Lebeya told parliamentarians that, aside from combining four cases into a single docket, the special police investigative unit had managed to follow “one act” transaction, on the basis of apparent fraud, in the past year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.