A string of letters between former National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) boss Shaun Abrahams and Hawks head Godfrey Lebeya reveal how a contractual dispute with a forensic firm investigating Bosasa led to delays in the arrest of those implicated in the prison tenders corruption scandal. In one letter, from Abrahams to Lebeya in August last year requesting Lebeya’s intervention, the NPA head raised serious concerns about delays in finalising Integrated Forensic Accounting Services’s investigation into Bosasa’s financials. The forensic firm’s findings, once finalised, would be part of the evidence used in January 2019 to charge officials from the department of correctional services (DCS) and Bosasa’s executives implicated in the Special Investigations Unit’s (SIU) 2009 draft report into allegations of corruption. “The team has held several meetings with the investigator assigned and as a result two issues remain outstanding,” Abrahams wrote in a letter dated August 10 2018. “The first being the provision of hard copies of the documents the prosecution intend to rely on to prove the allegations in a docket format. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.