It is uncanny how, long before Babes Wodumo’s assault at the hands of boyfriend Mampintsha became a national conversation, her 2016 hit Wololo provided clues about the milieu out of which she rose and by which, in many respects, she continues to be hemmed in. Monday morning’s live Instagram post appears to be her latest attempt to break free from what many are characterising as a suffocating relationship that has left her career at a crossroads. Wodumo’s sister and her manager, Nonduh Simelane, said the singer was no longer professionally linked to Mampintsha’s record company. “She hasn’t been linked to West Ink for over a year,” she said. “She has her own company, Wena Wodumo Entertainment.” An immediate conundrum for Babes is that her standout song, produced by the Distruction Boyz, is partly a praise song for Mampintsha, DJ Tira (Mampintsha’s former boss) and the male-dominated camps that comprise their respective labels, West Ink and Afrotainment. Oddly enough, it is also a tongue-in-cheek cautionary tale about the absurdities, rather than the dangers, of binge-drinking around cliques of men. The song’s opening refrain, which includes the line “Wavuk’ek’seni, awaz’ulalephi [You woke up not knowing where you are]”, apparently relates a real-life incident Wodumo had witnessed. In the video, too, this scene is also seemingly alluded to, except that it is followed by more partying, with teenage girls in denim shorts and bunny ears flanking a proprietorial Mampintsha, who sits in the centre of the scene on the bonnet of an old-model Mercedes-Benz clutching one of the shoot’s ubiquitous red plastic cups. A few metres from him, as if on a short leash, Wodumo, also clad in denim shorts, dances to her song. The visuals of the video are significant, if only for what we have come to know about Wodumo’s career. Her only album to date, Gqom Queen, Vol 1, was a stage-managed farce, with Mampintsha, at the height of his charisma, appearing in all of its 15 songs. But as Wodumo’s star rose, largely off the back of that one hit, there was a sense that not all was stable at West Ink. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.