A senior SAA executive has been suspended amid allegations of spying — and refusing to give his “free” business class seat to a paying customer. Vuyo Tuku, who is the acting customer experience executive, was allegedly caught on closed circuit cameras at Airways Park in the OR Tambo International Airport precinct sharing sensitive company information. It could not be established what information was being shared, or with whom, but two sources said the cameras, in his office, recorded him emailing the information. At the same time the executive allegedly had a complaint lodged against him by a captain after he refused to vacate his business class seat to accommodate a passenger whose seat had broken down. SAA spokesperson Tlali Tlali confirmed Tuku’s suspension pending finalisation of an internal investigation, but said the airline’s policy was that he could not divulge reasons for the suspension to ensure “an untainted process, which acknowledges the rights of employees and observe principles of fairness”. Speaking generally, Tlali said that rebate tickets, which are part of industry travel benefits, are offered in certain categories of discounts and in all instances require payment of benefit taxes by all employees. “The rebate tickets policy, among other things, provides that passengers who travel on revenue tickets must always take priority on flights and preference on seats over employees travelling on rebate tickets. This means, employees using rebate tickets are never strictly guaranteed travel and must always yield to passengers traveling on revenue tickets. “The same policy provisions apply and are enforceable on rebate tickets whether on leisure or duty travel.” He added: “Noncompliance with any provision of the rebate policy or any other policy for that matter, constitutes misconduct.” Tuku said the incident, which happened on his flight back from Brazil, did not involve a rebate ticket because it was booked by work, for work. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.