President Cyril Ramaphosa — who did not attend the general assembly of world leaders at the United Nations in New York because he stayed home to address the pressing issues of gender-based violence and the laggard economy — has made the clearest statement yet on a future decarbonised South Africa. The statement, handed to UN secretary general António Guterres on Tuesday, reads: “We will be enhancing our current mitigation national development plan (NDC) by the end of 2020. Additional mitigation ambition by 2030 will require a bold programme which targets our key emissions source, the electricity sector, and goes beyond current plans to invest further in renewable energy. “To this end, a proposed $11-billion (R160-billion) just transition transaction is being developed, consisting of a blended finance facility and would be the largest climate finance transaction to date, having a significant emissions impact.” “Like all countries of the world, we recognise the urgency with which we must reduce our dependence on fossil fuels and move towards a carbon-neutral future,” Ramaphosa said, adding that the country’s blueprint for energy security, the integrated resource plan (IRP), will soon be finalised. The present IRP process has come under criticism for its achingly slow pace of progress, with critics saying this flies in the face of growing international concern over the climate emergency, hamstrings fixing the Eskom fiasco and means the country is not moving fast enough to benefit from falling renewable energy prices. Ramaphosa said in his statement: [The IRP] “calls for an energy mix that includes a significantly increased component of energy from renewable sources, as well as from traditional sources that include coal, natural gas and nuclear energy”. The IRP is intended to direct the expansion of electricity supply over a given period by identifying investments in the electricity sector that allow the country to meet forecasted demand at minimum cost. Matthew Parks, parliamentary officer for trade union federation Cosatu, says the National Economic Development and Labour Council (Nedlac) IRP process has been finalised and signed off. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.