Global tourism giant Thomas Cook collapsed in spectacular style this week, largely because of a debt of £1.7-billion and bad management and in part because of it cumbersome business model. But industry sources say South Africa’s tourism companies do not face a similar risk. Tshifhiwa Tshivhengwa, chief executive of the Tourism Business Council of South Africa, said the country’s tourist companies are agile and serve different tourism segments. He added that the demise of Thomas Cook has more to do with the company itself and its mismanagement of its finances, but its collapse did not mean tourism in general was in trouble. The world’s oldest travel firm entered into compulsory liquidation after it failed to attain a $1.1-billion loan from its creditors, leaving 600 000 holidaymakers, including more than 150 000 British citizens, stranded abroad. The company, which was started in the 1840s by Thomas Cook when he began running train trips through the English Midlands, is seen to have had a bloated structure, made far too little use of the internet in its business and to unnecessarily own infrastructure, including retail outlets, airlines, resorts and hotels. The threat of a no-deal Brexit also saw much of its largest market — British holidaymakers — decide to take their holidays locally. The company collapsed after it failed to put a rescue package together. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.