Speaker of Parliament Thandi Modise has entered the fray in the court battle between President Cyril Ramaphosa and the public protector, saying she wants to join the case to challenge the protector’s Bosasa report in her own right. The court case over Busisiwe Mkhwebane’s Bosasa report is set to be one of the most significant legal and political battles of the president’s first years in office, and has pulled in some key state institutions — the Speaker, the Financial Intelligence Centre (FIC), the Information Regulator — and an opposition party, the Economic Freedom Fighters. The investigation at the centre of the case was the result of a complaint by Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane that Ramaphosa had misled Parliament when he answered a parliamentary question about a R500 000 donation from Bosasa’s Gavin Watson to his CR17 campaign. She also directed the NPA to “take note” of her report and “conduct further investigation into the prima facie evidence of money laundering as uncovered during my investigation”. In her report, Mkhwebane found Ramaphosa had deliberately misled Parliament and went even further, detailing transfers of millions of rands between the CR17 campaign’s various bank accounts. Mkhwebane said there was “merit” in a suspicion of money laundering and that “such a scenario, when looked at carefully, creates a situation of the risk of some sort of state capture by those donating these moneys to the campaign”. However, she stopped short of making a finding in that regard, instead directing the speaker to demand that Ramaphosa disclose the details of donations to the CR17 campaign. Ramaphosa has challenged the whole of her report, saying it is irrational, that her investigation was procedurally flawed and that she had an ulterior purpose. Much is at stake in the case for both the president and Mkhwebane. The public protector is already limping after the bloody nose she got from the Constitutional Court, which found that she was dishonest and lacked integrity — leading Parliament to make rules for an impeachment investigation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.