Two contenders are believed to be in the running to replace James Selfe as federal executive chairperson, one of the most senior positions in the Democratic Alliance. Former Nelson Mandela Bay mayor Athol Trollip reportedly has the backing of party members close to DA leader Mmusi Maimane. Senior party members have also indicated that MP Thomas Walters has put his hand up. Nominations open later this month. The federal executive chair steers the party’s most senior decision-making body and the position is seen as second only to the party’s leader in terms of its power and importance. In June, Selfe announced he would be leaving the position after almost two decades to concentrate on heading the party’s governance unit. It was thought that the party needed more stability in and co-ordination between the municipalities, including the metros, in the Western Cape where it governs. Trollip, who is the party’s federal chairperson, said he could not comment because it was an internal party matter. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.