The Pretoria high court has ordered the department of trade and industry (DTI) to pay Murendi Properties and Building Suppliers, a company in its black industrialists programme, a R14.2-million grant that the DTI awarded to the company. Murendi’s chief executive Mphedziseni Makhesha says that, even though the court made the order in March this year, he is still waiting for the payment, which was approved in October 2017. Murendi applied for the money in August 2016 through the DTI’s black industrialists programme to co-fund a R46-million expansion of its manufacturing plant for concrete roof tiles. The department agreed to a grant payment of R14 210 953 with the rest of the project being funded by a R32-million loan from the Industrial Development Corporation (IDC). The state-owned IDC, which falls under the DTI, is mandated to promote economic growth and industrial development and to develop domestic industrial capacity. The IDC loan was conditional on a grant being approved by the DTI. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.