Velenkosini Hlabisa may have served as a municipal councillor for 24 years, but the newly elected head of the Inkatha Freedom Party (IFP) still carries the air of a school principal about him, despite his move out of the classroom into local — and now national — politics. Impeccably dressed in a light-blue suit, checked tie and highly polished brogues, Hlabisa, 54, clearly hasn’t lost that sense of order, protocol and discipline through five terms in local government and a move to the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature earlier this year. Hlabisa, a former IFP Youth Brigade secretary who joined the party at the age of 13 in 1978, only left his principal’s post in 2016 to become mayor of the Big Five Hlabisa municipality. Until then, Hlabisa, who served as IFP KwaZulu-Natal chairperson from 2011 before he became secretary general in 2018, had continued to teach while serving as a councillor at the Hlabisa municipality and in the Umkhanyakude district municipality. He was in Johannesburg this week on a media charm-offensive after his election to succeed the IFP founder and president for four decades, Mangosuthu Buthelezi, on August 24. Buthelezi announced his retirement as party leader ahead of the May 8 general elections, paving the way for Hlabisa, who he favoured, to be elected unopposed as president. Tensions around the party’s internal succession battle saw the conference postponed several times since 2012. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.