Police have promised a more strategic approach to the extended military support of an anti-crime programme in Cape Town. This week, President Cyril Ramaphosa approved the extension of the deployment of more than 1 000 troops to gang-hit parts of the city. The Mother City — South Africa’s most visited tourist destination — has for almost two months been home to a South African Defence Force (SANDF) battalion; there to help quell gang and gun violence. Crime statistics released last week showed that 3 974 people were killed in Cape Town in the past financial year.The province has a murder rate of 60 per 100 000 — double the national average. Western Cape forensic pathologists say next year’s crime figures will be considerably higher, because the latest stats don’t take into account the spike in gang killings experienced in the few months before the SANDF was deployed. Since July, troops sent to Cape Town have been assisting the South African Police Service (SAPS) in what they have called Operation Lockdown. Cape Town’s most violent areas appeared to have welcomed the operation of raids, patrols, helicopter drops and roadblocks. It includes soldiers, traffic officials, metro police, law enforcement and various police units. Despite this, gang violence has continued unabated. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.