Seriti Resources’s second big coal mine purchase in as many years has been dogged by controversy about a meeting between the company, the sellers (Australian mining house South32) and the government. Seriti chief executive Mike Teke and director Lefa Mbethe and a team from South32 met senior department of mineral resources and energy (DMRE) officials three weeks ago — a full week before the Australian giant announced to shareholders that Seriti had won exclusive rights to negotiate to buy its coal business, South African Energy Coal (SAEC). It has been speculated that, should the deal be concluded, Seriti would become Eskom’s second-biggest coal supplier, at 32.5% — about 39-million tonnes — of the state-owned utility’s coal procurement spend. The deal has attracted criticism of advantage and political patronage, because no other bidder was granted the same courtesy of a meeting department officials. An observer with intimate knowledge of the deal said the “strange” meeting should be seen in the context of Teke being one of the donors for President Cyril Ramaphosa’s campaign for the December 2017 ANC presidential race, which he won at Nasrec in Johannesburg. A department source said: “It is strange that they went to [the department] and the other second bidder was not invited to such a meeting. Does this mean people must first donate before they can get contracts?” A mining insider said: “It does not make sense because the transaction is still subject to competition commission approvals and both parties are familiar with the department as they already own mining assets.” Speaking in general terms, an attorney at SWVG Inc experienced in mining matters including acquisitions, said it was impossible to establish whether any meetings held with the department in which a seller and purchaser is present is above board. “It would seem in instances where a tender/bidding process is still open that such meeting would not be proper, as what would be the purpose of having such a meeting? “If, however, there is an exclusive party who bid, it may well be that a meeting with the buyer and seller with the DMR [department of mineral resources] may be to determine implementation and other aspects which by law require the DMR’s input and involvement.” In these cases once a deal between seller and buyer has been reached, and the Competition Commission approves the transaction, the DMR as regulator has to approve an application in terms of section 11 of the Minerals, Petroleum Resources and Development Act (MPRDA). Seriti and the government have downplayed the meeting, describing it as just a courtesy call. Seriti’s spokesperson, Charmane Russell, said the donation and the sale of the mine were “completely separate” matters. “Mike Teke’s donation was done in his personal capacity, with no reference at all to Seriti,” she said. “I can confirm that a delegation led by South 32 did meet with representatives of the DMRE this week. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.