Wednesday. I’ve been up since 4.20am. Clichéd, I know, but in my head it made sense to start commemorating such an auspicious day in South African history — September 18 2018 — at a suitably symbolic time. It’s been a year since Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, bless his soul, announced the destruction of another building block of colonialism and apartheid — the criminalisation of cannabis — by the Constitutional Court. Twelve months to the day since the court, in its infinite wisdom, dragged us a step further out of our twisted Calvinist past and legalised cannabis growth and possession for personal and private use. The unanimous decision by the court was, for me and hundreds of thousands like me, a moment of great personal liberation, something not to be forgotten easily. Granted, we’re still a long way from the point where our existing recreational cannabis industry gets regulated and the medicinal side of things gets going properly, but it’s a beautiful thing not to have to look over my shoulder every time I light a spliff. In terms of the court’s judgment, the state was given two years to come up with a comprehensive legal framework to regulate cannabis. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.