Two children, then aged eight and 14, from Sterkspruit in the Eastern Cape had to leave school in 2015 and sit at home after being chased out of their primary school because they did not have birth certificates. In Alexandria, also in the Eastern Cape, eight learners from a safe house for abandoned and orphaned children were expelled from a primary school for the same reason. These are examples that form part of an application brought by the Centre for Child Law, Phakamisa High School and 37 children — represented by the Legal Resources Centre — against the department of basic education (DBE), the Eastern Cape department of education and the department of home affairs. The application comes after a 2016 decision by the provincial department of education to issue a circular to schools that said that funding for the purchases of learner support materials, such as textbooks and desks, and the allocation of teachers and funding for the school nutrition programme, would be based on the number of learners who have either a valid identity document, passport number, or asylum permit number. This forced some schools to expel undocumented learners, or not to admit them. The papers were filed at the Makhanda high court in 2017 and the case was heard this week. The Centre for Child Law wants the decision communicated by the circular to be reviewed and set aside. It argues that it violates the chilren’s rights to a basic education, to have their best interests considered paramount and to have their dignity respected. In the founding affidavit, the deputy director of the centre, Karabo Ozah, states that, since April 2016, funding for school nutrition has only been allocated for learners with the relevant documentation. It goes on to say that, in November 2016, schools were also allocated teachers based on the number of learners with the required documentation — and not the actual number of learners at the schools. Ozah argues that, although most people are registered with the department of home affairs when they are born, in some cases parents or guardians fail to register the birth of a child for multiple reasons out of their control. “It is a problem which disproportionately affects poor black learners and learners in rural communities where they are often left with family members while their parents take up employment in bigger towns or cities. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.