Breitling has announced a new partnership with Etihad Airways, the national airline of the United Arab Emirates. With an equal passion for aviation, quality and precision, Etihad offers a perfect platform for Breitling, which will serve as the Official Timekeeper. To celebrate the partnership, Breitling has introduced the Aviator 8 Etihad Limited Edition in black steel.
The model, which has been co-designed with Etihad Airways, is limited to 500 pieces and completed in Arabic numerals.  At the launch event, Breitling’s chief marketing officer Tim Sayler said: “Etihad Airways and Breitling are united by a passion for aviation, as well as by their steadfast commitment to quality and precision.” Robin Kamark, chief commercial officer, Etihad Aviation Group, said: “As one of the world’s most innovative and punctual airlines, we are proud to mark the launch of this great partnership between two leading brands, which are world renowned for style, quality and precision. To mark our collaboration with Breitling as Etihad’s Official Timekeeper, we have introduced the Aviator 8 Etihad Limited Edition, reflecting our Arabian heritage, age-old traditions and focus on the future. We are confident it will be popular among customers and watch collectors.” The Aviator 8 Etihad Limited Edition prominently displays the day of the week and the date along with the time. The day of the week is indicated at the 12 o’clock position, while the date is ideally placed at 6 o’clock. Powered by the Breitling Calibre 45, this automatic wristwatch has a bidirectional rotor winding with over 38 hours of power reserve. The black dial is revealed through a double anti-reflective sapphire glass. The 41mm DLC-coated stainless steel case has a solid screwed back and is presented on a black leather strap. The model features Arabic language numbers in a striking gold hue, with matching gold hands. The Aviator 8 Etihad Limited Edition is a COSC-certified chronometer (The Contrôle Officiel Suisse des Chronomètres is the institute responsible for certifying the accuracy and precision of Swiss watches) and produced in a series limited to just 500 pieces. The model will be exclusively available in Etihad’s home — Abu Dhabi — before being released to the wider market and across the globe.  Among Willy Breitling’s many celebrated achievements was the establishment of the Huit Aviation Department in 1938. He was aware of the strict requirements for military and civil aviation, and the department’s name – the French word for “eight” – was chosen to recall the eight days of power reserve offered by onboard clocks and other dashboard instruments. The Huit Aviation Department was also responsible for the development of Breitling’s wrist chronographs for aviation use.The timing of the foundation of the Huit Aviation Department was fortuitous: its products immediately attracted the attention of military aviators, and as World War II approached, the department received a large order from the Royal Air Force for onboard chronographs destined for its legendary fighter planes. The Navitimer 8 collection honours Willy Breitling and his Huit Aviation Department. Breitling’s Aviator 8 Etihad Limited Edition continues the company’s proud pilot watch heritage and is a fitting celebration of Breitling’s partnership with Etihad Airways.  Since 1884, Breitling has established a global reputation for high-precision timepieces, its pioneering role in the development of the wrist chronograph, and its uncompromising commitment to design excellence. With the brand’s association with aviation, Breitling has shared the finest moments in humankind’s conquest of the skies. Renowned for its spirit of innovation,it has also earned a privileged place in the science, sport, and technology spheres. Breitling manufactures its own components in-house,and the quality of every watch is confirmed by its status as a COSC-certified chronometer, made in Switzerland.