Thirty-seven-year-old Charles Ntini was shot and killed while driving a truck on the N12 last month. His lifeless body was found on the Harding road in Paddock, in southern KwaZulu-Natal in the early hours of the morning. Although the motive behind the killing is yet to be determined, it is believed that his death is in line with the ongoing violence against foreign truck drivers on the country’s roads. Ntini was Zimbabwean, and is one of an estimated 213, mostly foreign, truck drivers who have been killed in these truck attacks since March last year. The Road Freight Association puts the cost of the ongoing attacks on trucks at about R1.2-billion with 1 200 vehicles and cargo destroyed during this period. On Tuesday, 20 people were arrested in KwaZulu-Natal in the latest round of violence in the freight industry. The arrests came after a widely circulated WhatsApp message calling for a strike by South African truck drivers against the employment of foreign drivers. So far no organisation has taken responsibility for the wave of violence. A report released by Human Rights Watch last month showed that most perpetrators of the attacks against foreign truck drivers claimed affiliation to the drivers’ organisation, the All Truck Drivers Foundation (ATDF) — an allegation which the organisation has denied. The leader of the foundation, Sipho Zungu, admits that his organisation has been at the forefront of calling for truck owners to refrain from employing foreign truck drivers “in order to protect South African jobs”. But he denies that his organisation is behind the strikes that occurred this week: “Our organisation has never called for a strike and we have taken the correct steps by engaging with the truck owners and government regarding our grievances.” The South African Transport and Allied Workers Union (Satawu) has distanced itself from ongoing strikes in the sector as well as the attacks on foreign truck drivers. “It’s really ridiculous that people would call a strike via social media and then threaten violence,” said the union’s spokesperson, Zanele Sabela. “That is problematic to say that people who would be working would be hurt. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.