In June 2016, KwaZulu-Natal co-operative governance and traditional affairs MEC Nomusa Dube-Ncube appointed Sizwe Hadebe to run the crisis-stricken Umsunduzi local municipality. But instead of turning the province’s failing capital around, Hadebe presided over its further decline, giving himself a R600 000 a year salary increase and running up a R250 000 bed and breakfast bill, despite owning four properties in Pietermaritzburg. Hadebe — who replace axed city manager Mxolisi Nkosi, who was fired over allegations of corruption — was suspended by the city council in August 2017. He remained on full pay until August 5 this year, when councillors across parties resolved to terminate his five-year contract. Despite criminal charges being laid against Hadebe by a new administrator, S’bu Sithole, councillors voted to pay him three months’ salary as a severance package, according to council sources. The allegations against Hadebe, a close ally of key supporters of former president Jacob Zuma, including former deputy mayor Mzi Zuma, are contained in a forensic report commissioned by former mayor Themba Njilo. Njilo was part of the ANC executive committee contingent recalled in Pietermaritzburg and Durban over the collapse of governance and political infighting in both cities. The investigations into Hadebe began after members of the South African Municipal Workers Union and a number of line managers in the city complained to the provincial department of co-operative governance about Hadebe’s conduct. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.