A fronting showdown is looming at the B-BBEE Commission between a Bidvest subsidiary and a small, black-owned company over a laundry tender at the Nelson Mandela Children’s Hospital. MMK Industrial Laundry, a small business owned by Ivan Motlogeloa, has approached the B-BBEE Commission accusing First Garment Rental, a subsidiary of corporate giant Bidvest, of using it as a front company to win a lucrative laundry tender at the late icon’s eponymous hospital. At the centre of the dispute, MMK alleges that First Garment Rental used it as a partner in 2017 to win the laundry tender and sidelined it when it commenced work at the hospital. The commission has now startedits investigation and written to First Garment Rental to answer to the allegations of fronting against it. Fronting is a criminal activity, punishable by law. The B-BBEE Commission’s Madidimalo Ramare confirmed that the commission had received the complaint and —“after merit assessment” — it was being considered. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.