On Tuesday, Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo denied former South African Revenue Service (Sars) commissioner Tom Moyane the right to cross-examine Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan. Moyane has spectacularly lost every legal battle against the Sars commission, his disciplinary hearing and his axing. While at the helm of Sars, Moyane mimicked former president Jacob Zuma in evading accountability. Throughout his disciplinary inquiry, chaired by advocate Azhar Bham, as well as the Nugent commission of inquiry into tax administration and governance at Sars, Moyane did not once rebut allegations made against him by more than 50 senior Sars staff members. Instead, he cried conspiracy, hatred and procedural unfairness — the latter despite being given ample opportunity to respond to Nugent, which he chose not to do. Moyane did not explain why he and Boston-based consultancy Bain & Company had begun “restructuring” Sars before he was appointed commissioner, and why contracts with Bain and information technology company Gartner, with its links to his friend Patrick Monyeki, were awarded unlawfully — a finding by the Sars commission. Nor has he explained his inaction in relation to his second-in-charge, Jonas Makwakwa, who has also not answered to money-laundering allegations in relation to the R1.2-million deposited into his personal bank account and that of his partner, Kelly-Ann Elskie. As an aside, the Hawks concluded their investigation into the Makwakwa matter in November and handed it over to the National Prosecuting Authority. Six months later and nearly three years after the damning allegations surfacing, there is little clarity on whether Makwakwa will ever explain the bulk cash deposits into his bank account. Moyane sought to have his pet project ventilated in the state capture commission of inquiry before Zondo on the discredited “rogue unit” narrative. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.