Special counsel Robert Mueller’s report on Russian interference in the 2016 election is topping the Amazon best-seller charts. Paperback versions of the Mueller report, which was released publicly on Thursday, figure in the number one, two and five spots on Amazon US’s list of best sellers. The three versions are to be released on April 30. In third and fourth position on the Amazon US list are Where the Crawdads Sing by Delia Owens and former First Lady Michelle Obama’s memoir, Becoming. Topping the Amazon list is a version of the Mueller report being published by Scribner in collaboration with The Washington Post, which is owned by Amazon founder Jeff Bezos. A spokesman for Simon & Schuster, which owns Scribner, said 350,000 copies had been printed but declined to release a figure for the number of pre-orders for the book. The book totals 736 pages, including a preface and commentary by two Post reporters, Rosalind Helderman and Matt Zapotosky. An audio version of the book is already on sale, Simon & Schuster Audio said, narrated by four Post reporters and 12 other narrators who began recording simultaneously the moment the report was released. A version of the Mueller report from Skyhorse was in second position, while one published by Melville House was in fifth. Skyhorse did not immediately respond to requests for comment, but Melville House said it has printed 200 000 copies. The Mueller report confirmed that Russian operatives had meddled in the 2016 election to help Trump beat Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton, including by hacking into email accounts. But the special counsel’s 22-month-long investigation did not find that Trump and his team had criminally conspired with the Russian effort to sway the election in his favour. During the probe, Trump also repeatedly tried to hamper Mueller’s work, the report said. But Mueller did not rule one way or the other on whether Trump had committed the crime of obstruction of justice. Trump’s presidency has been a boon for political works, with some books exceeding sales of one million copies. © Agence France-Presse