An archaeological find on Robben Island could unveil long-lost secrets of the former prison’s colonial past. The Robben Island Museum has put out a call for an excavation to shed more light on human remains found on the grounds of the former apartheid-era prison. “These remains were discovered at the maximum security prison precinct, next to the kramat [a shrine to Muslim holy men],” the museum said in a statement. “The preliminary assessment found that the human remains belonged to multiple individuals or at least two human beings as there were three femoral bones discovered on the scene.” It said there is no decisive evidence as to whom the remains belong to. “Preliminary inspection of the exposed bones by specialists from these competent bodies suggests that the bones were buried more than 50 years ago,” the statement said. The island was declared a prison by the apartheid government in 1959, with the first prisoners being sentenced to the prison in 1961 after the Sharpeville massacre and subsequent protests. Cape Town history and cultural activist Patric Tariq Mellet says Robben Island has a more than 500-year history as a trading post, a mail collection post, a leper colony and a place for the mentally ill. The island had also been used to house banished religious leaders. The Moturu kramat “is a sacred site for Muslims on Robben Island, built in 1969 to commemorate Sayed Adurohman Moturu ... This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.