If a week in politics is a long time, as the old adage goes, then a year is a surely an eternity. Last year, President Cyril Ramaphosa’s first State of the Nation address boldly announced “a new dawn”, signalling the end of “all the negativity that has dogged our country”, including perceptions of widespread corruption under his embattled predecessor, Jacob Zuma. Despite the president’s glossy efforts to present his tenure as one of good governance and accountability, his administration has been plagued by continual allegations of corruption. The commission of inquiry into allegations of state capture, led by Deputy Chief Justice Raymond Zondo, has already unveiled the extent to which Bosasa and the Gupta brothers influenced decision-making at the highest levels of the state. And newly unearthed allegations of underhand governance have tainted some of the most senior members of Ramaphosa’s inner circle. Many journalists and researchers have attempted to calculate the costs of “state capture” — from the market panic about the revolving door in the treasury, to the costs of Eskom’s malpractice, tangibly illustrated in load-shedding — to show how corruption affects us all indirectly. But what about other forms of corruption that take place on a more direct, personal level? Not the sort of corruption that flashes across the headlines, but corruption with a face, a name and an official title. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.