Would you know a unicorn if you saw one? This is not the mythical single-horned quadruped but rather the tech giant providing digital services that finds traction and shows explosive growth when so many similar start-ups end up in the dustbin of internet failure. Nigeria-headquartered Jumia, which operates in 14 countries and claims 81 000 sellers and more than four million consumers, believes it is Africa’s unicorn and the continent’s answer to unicorns such as Amazon, eBay, Alibaba, Tencent and Jingdong. Investors appear to be buying its story, based on the response to its initial public offering (IPO) on the New York Stock Exchange last week, which saw its share price rise by 75% on its first day of trading, giving the e-commerce offering a market value of $1.9-billion. Jumia, founded in Lagos in 2012, launched the same year in Morocco, Egypt and South Africa (where it operates as Zando). It started selling mobile phones and women’s fashion, but now offers a myriad goods, including food, furniture and cosmetics. It now operates in six regions in the continent, with 28% of its users in Nigeria, 20% in Egypt and 20% in West Africa. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.