Although the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development advances a commitment by United Nations member states that “no one will be left behind” and pledges to “endeavour to reach the furthest behind first”, South Africa, like many other countries, has not fully translated this call into practice. Everyday realities show that poor participation by citizens in local governance processes thrives, and this adversely affects the development of disadvantaged people, such as those living in informal settlements, which are characterised by the poor provision of basic services, including water, electricity and sanitation, as a result of inadequate investment in resources. “How can someone participate [effectively] in something she/he doesn’t understand?” asked a resident, referring to integrated development planning (IDP). “They [municipal officials] don’t know what we suffer from,” said another. These quotes reflect the frustrations of people who live in informal settlements in the Ekurhuleni metropolitan municipality and the Emalahleni local municipality where there is poor participation in such processes as development planning and municipal budgeting. This frustration provides grounds for the growing trend of residents in informal settlements banding together to speak with one voice. Planact has begun supporting this trend by facilitating the creation of two clusters, each comprising more than 10 informal settlements, to help improve participation in local governance. Despite the pledge of “leaving no one behind”, the sad reality is the paradox of the South African government’s development agenda of “improving the welfare of societies: ending extreme poverty, reducing inequalities, and addressing discriminatory barriers” and the reality of inadequate basic services in many residential areas, and municipalities’ inadequate commitment to addressing inequalities. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.