The African Transformation Movement (ATM), rocked by an internal breakaway before it can contest its first national elections, believes it can still make its presence felt on May 8 — despite one of its founders attempting to have it deregistered as a party. Although much of the early attention drawn by the fledgling party has focused on its association with businessman-cum-civil servant Mzwanele ‘Jimmy’ Manyi and former president Jacob Zuma, the ATM is the creation of the South African Council of Messianic Churches in Christ (SACMCC), a body of predominantly African churches that have historically fallen outside of the South African Council of Churches. The party, which boasts of a “ready-made support base” in the country’s messianic churches, is a proponent of populist policies such as bringing back the death penalty. And although its formative stages were linked to unhappiness over the removal of Zuma as president, one analyst has cautioned that the ATM’s leaders have “unfettered ambitions” of their own. A record number of new political parties have signed up for a spot on the national ballot and there is potential for a variety of post-poll coalitions. Polling how these parties will perform has been impossible, because there is no data yet against which to measure them. Vuyolwethu Zungula, the ATM’s presidential candidate, believes the new kid on the political block’s performance in an Eastern Cape by-election last month is no fluke — or miracle, for that matter. He’s been hard on the campaign trail in the Eastern Cape, KwaZulu-Natal and Mpumalanga and believes the ATM will take a similar slice of the national and provincial vote. But the ATM is already facing internal trouble. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.