South Africa is one of numerous jurisdictions globally implementing new value-added tax (VAT) rules designed to rise to the challenges of a digitising marketplace that can operate beyond the reaches of the tax authorities. These new regulations, which in South Africa’s case took effect on April 1 this year, are a first step in a process of sweeping tax reforms intended to make multinationals pay their fair share of corporate tax in the jurisdictions where they are active. Driven by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), which promotes trade and investment among its 36 member countries, the VAT initiative is intended to tax the $2-trillion in annual e-commerce revenues. The OECD says in a March report, titled The Role of Digital Platforms in the Collection of VAT/GST on Online Sales, that global business-to-consumer (B2C) revenues are projected to rise to $4.5-trillion by 2022. “It is mainly the growth in international online B2C trade, both in volume and in number of participants, which has created the most pressing challenges for VAT/GST collection.” It says digital platforms allow businesses, particularly smaller businesses, to efficiently reach millions of consumers in what is now a global marketplace. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.