Read the unembargoed March 29 to April 4 edition of the Mail & Guardian.  Freshly appointed commissioner Edward Kieswetter says he is up to the task of turning tax agency around. Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan is once again being accused of being behind the Sars rogue unit, this time by the Economic Freedom Fighters. ‘At family gatherings my uncles would say our clan name with so much pride’. The Electoral Commission will listen to objections to names on electoral lists in some circumstances. R80-million left the CSOS in two tranches under the pretext of being an investment. Memos reveal the oil company was concerned about irregularities. South Africa’s response to Cyclone Idai is a serious warning about how poorly equipped the country is to deal with the disasters that climate change is sure to bring. The Indian prime minister said his country had joined the United States, Russia and China. The NDPP wants to know how the Harry Gwala district mayor was charged without evidence. An investigation reveals that a key Belgian institution is again involved in money-laundering. Widows of government employees have called for a relaxation of the income tax law. Arcelor Mittal, charged with toxic air and water pollution, seems to have bulldozed through graves to create a perimeter fence. Smaller parties in the Western Cape say the most pressing issue of unemployment is not being addressed Three years into the country’s national rollout, less than a quarter of people who’ve started taking the wonder tablet are young women — despite skyrocketing HIV rates among them.
It turns out we may have been selling the HIV prevention pill all wrong. Despite president pulling out of election race, demonstrators continue to call for his departure. When floods caused by the storm Cyclone Idai submerged vast swathes of southern Malawi, villagers in Thaundi had to make some hurried life-or-death decisions. Cyclone Idai has caused severe damage and left people without members of their families, shelter or food to eat. From corner bakeries to mines, businesses bear the brunt of the power-cut pain, with alternative energy generation solutions mired in bureaucracy. Health tax adds to woes of local producers, who want it dropped, but experts say the industry is simply not competitive enough. Debt counselling includes fees that some people cannot afford but a new Bill aims to prevent socioeconomic discrimination. Ahead of a crucial conference on international wildlife, the debate over whether to allow trade in rhino horn to fund conservation efforts rages on. The re-emergence of tension between the industry and government comes as the economy contends with stunted growth. Our yearning for good news lets our critical faculties fly into exile, so we need to be grounded. Universities in the Eastern Cape have not taken up the challenge of creating knowledge centres to produce solutions. South African scientists need to develop health technologies that respond to our society’s most pressing needs. Are we so in thrall to images of wealth that we would just stand there, agog at the spectacle, and not wonder about all this wasted electricity? As the first anniversary of the Great Return March approaches, Suraya Dadoo spoke to Ahmed Abu Artema, the man behind the weekly protests. Although corruption was a factor in the party’s decline in support in the 2014 and 2016 elections, poor service delivery was also a key element. In 2015, former president Thabo Mbeki led an African Union panel that sought to determine how much the African continent was losing every year. Our readers write in about Azapo, Islamophobia, the elections in the wake of Eskom’s woes and failing state-owned enterprises. Editorial: SA teams user in rare joy South African Sports teams will compete across all sports competitions this year. The evidence that linked a mayor to a murder has vanished ­— or never existed.  For good vibes and an arts fix, don’t miss this. “The most beautiful portraits of humans often occur when a person allows you in to glimpse the vulnerability and rawness of their being.” Film Festival Film blends documentary, improv and drama, all on a time-and-money shoestring. She might have softened her approach but her emotions still run high in all she does. The South African State Theatre will house Dance Umbrella Africa, which will be funded by the state. Permanent exhibition elements are arranged to immerse visitors fully in the experience.  The energy from the Afcon qualification may be exactly what the Clever Boys need to end the season right. A two-time winner of the G-Sport Women’s Sport Award and the 2016 WBF Promoter of the Year, Mbali Zantsi is determined to revive the glory of the game Give a decent location and a little promotion, and the crowds will flock to watch Spurs have a shiny new stadium, but they’ve now mysteriously lost their mojo.