Eskom must roughly halve its debt — reducing it by R250-billion — if it is to get back to an even financial footing based on current revenues, according to chairperson Jabu Mabuza. “Where we are … we need to have the ability [to], from our revenues, less our costs, we have an ability to service R250-billion less [in debt] than what we have,” Mabuza told journalists on Wednesday, after a briefing on the state of the power system. The utility outlined its plans to get the country through winter without load-shedding, or at the very least, with a maximum of 26 days of stage one load-shedding. This is provided that unplanned outages do not remove more than 9 500 megawatts from the grid. Although some stability has returned to the grid, Eskom’s financial woes continue. But Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan said the government would announce the package to address Eskom’s debt problems, either before elections or “soon thereafter”.  According to its latest financials, Eskom’s debt is about R420-billion, but Mabuza indicated that it has since risen. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.