In a bizarre twist of events at the Media Development and Diversity Agency (MDDA), managers have turned against the acting chief executive officer after she suspended a senior manager who is alleged to have embezzled the agency’s funds. One staffer, who had been booked off sick, was so intent on fighting the suspension that he arrived at a board meeting with breathing apparatus and an oxygen tank, to plead his case. Vuyelwa Mdazana was suspended in February after allegations were made that for at least three years she had been “moonlighting” at Forte community radio station based at Fort Hare University in Alice. MDDA is funded by the state through the department of communications and is tasked with funding community radio stations and newspapers. Mdazana is listed as one of the two directors of Forte. The other director is well-known East London businessman Luthando Bara. Forte is among the 10 community radio stations that were being funded by the MDDA. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.