School textbooks used by South African pupils contain an over-representation of white people, men and nuclear families and are often silent on same-sex families, disability and the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ) community, a report by the department of basic education has revealed. The report was the work of the interministerial task team appointed by the basic education minister, Angie Motshekga, in 2016 to look into the content and visuals in textbooks for racism, sexism and other forms of discrimination. Motshekga appointed the task team following a furore over a grade 10 life orientation textbook that blamed a girl for her rape. The textbook contained a story about a girl, Angie, who went to a party with friends, got drunk, and was pushed and locked into a room where a stranger raped her. She felt she could not report the rape to her parents because she did not ask for permission to go to the party. One of the questions about this scenario was: “List two ways in which Angie’s behaviour led to sexual intercourse.” At the time the department said that the question raised serious misconceptions and stereotypes about rape and the relationship between the perpetrator and the victim, in that the victim might have played a role that led to her being raped. The Textbook Evaluation Report reported on a sample of 48 textbooks out of the 630 currently in use. It found that white people are the most frequently represented race in text across all subjects. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.