The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF), rocked by fresh allegations of financial impropriety against its president, Julius Malema, by members of its central command, is doing damage control, dismissing the claims as the actions of disgruntled individuals. EFF MP Zolile Xalisa made the latest allegations in a resignation letter at the weekend, claiming Malema had failed to account for R2-million a month collected in levies from councillors, MPLs and MPs. Xalisa, who has since joined the African Transformation Movement (ATM), also claimed Malema had not accounted for about R20-million the party received from the legislatures every quarter. But EFF national spokesperson Mbuyiseni Ndlozi said the EFF’s financials were in “perfect standing”. He said Xalisa had left the party after failing to make the top 25 on the list of candidates for the National Assembly because he had lost popularity with the EFF’s branches. “Xalisa seems to have a problem with the EFF five years later, after sitting in all its highest structures, only after not making it to the top of the parliamentary list,” Ndlozi said. “The reality is that the man is disgruntled for not being pushed to the top of the list. He is calculating that he should be in the first 25 names as a current MP, but the internal democratic processes of the EFF resolved otherwise. “There is no need for him to lie just because he did not win favour with branches,” he added. In his public resignation, Xalisa accused Malema of failing to account for about R1.7-million a month collected in levies from the EFF’s 825 councillors. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.