One of the toughest aspects of taking the hot seat at the South African Revenue Service (Sars) was “being thrown in the deep end” without the benefit of any handover or wisdom from his predecessor, recalls outgoing acting commissioner Mark Kingon. Nevertheless, he describes his time in the role as “a privilege” — despite it having been a tumultuous year for the revenue service, as it came to grips with the legacy of former commissioner Tom Moyane’s leadership and the revelations of the Nugent commission. It is the people at the institution, Kingon said, and having to engage with and encourage them, that were the best part of the job. Unlike Kingon — who was thrust into the limelight after Moyane’s acrimonious exit from the tax authority — Edward Kieswetter, the newly appointed commissioner, will have the benefit of Kingon’s more than 30 years of experience when he officially begins work on May 1. Kingon could not think of one specific piece of advice that he would give Kieswetter going into the job. “There is just so much … wisdom that I have gleaned over the last year,” he says. But rebuilding the agency’s relationship with taxpayers, improving services to them and making it easier and more streamlined for them to pay tax is something Kingon is going to “urge as a direction”, he said. This week’s preliminary revenue collection figures revealed a shocking shortfall for the year of R57.4-billion. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.