The wrangling around the #AlexShutDown protests has exposed pre-election politics in all its gritty pettiness. Amid the noise of a mayor who would not face residents of his city, a governing party shutting its eyes to its own past failures and accusations being flung around of orchestrated discontent, the fact remains that the plight of the people of Alexandra continues to be dire, a quarter-century into democracy. One of the country’s oldest townships in South Africa’s largest city took centre stage this week when a group of protesters made their way across the highway into the richest square mile on the continent, Sandton, to hand over a memorandum to the Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba. Last Friday, Municipal IQ, a data and intelligence service, announced a record high number of service delivery protests countrywide in the first quarter of 2019. By the end of the week, protests had erupted in Tshwane, Khayelitsha, Kroonstad and Orange Grove in Johannesburg. Municipal IQ said the uptick in protest action was expected as communities make the most of the opportunity to draw politicians’ attention to their plights ahead of the key polls on May 8. The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) and the Democratic Alliance (DA) have accused the ANC of instigating the Alex protests — with the EFF warning the governing party that its conduct could lead to the country being set alight as the discontent spreads. The response by various spheres of government to the Alex protests illustrated poor intergovernmental relations and a lack of trust between the DA-led City of Johannesburg and the ANC provincial government. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.