Recent scandals in the private and public sectors have focused attention on the duties of directors to the companies they serve, the shareholders and employees, and the public. In the face of increased scrutiny for noncompliance with fiduciary duties and the threat of legal liability, many directors vacate their positions before the end of their terms of office. This includes directors of some state-owned entities (SOEs). At the beginning of February, nine out of 11 Public Investment Corporation (PIC) board members wrote to Finance Minister Tito Mboweni requesting that he release them from their roles as directors. The letter cited a “concerted effort to discredit the board” as one reason for their request. This followed allegations that certain PIC board members had improperly influenced investment decisions or failed to provide proper oversight over investment decisions such as the controversial R4.3-billion investment into Ayo Technology Solutions. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.