We are just weeks away from elections with many voters unsure who to vote for or if to vote at all. The petrol price went up steeply, the economy is marooned, corruption news continues to come thick and fast and the public protector, a loose cannon at the best of times, is investigating President Cyril Ramaphosa for monies received from sleaze machine Bosasa. As fast as we throw billions Eskom’s way to keep the diesel generators running, it presents new bills of even more billions it wants from us. It will now only be okay if it can somehow reduce its R420-billion debt by R250-billion or so. Billions have been stolen, but even though the perpetrators are named in any number of reports and inquiries, none is yet to see the inside of a courtroom, never mind attend a fitting for an orange overall. Copies of the book, Gangster State: Unravelling Ace Magashule’s Web of Capture by Pieter-Louis Myburgh, were torn up at a launch in Sandton on Tuesday. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.