The cost of tertiary education is now such a burden to students in the United States that some have taken to selling a portion of their potential future earnings to fund it. Bloomberg reports that Purdue University in Indiana has arranged more than 700 contracts worth $9.5-million and has secured investment funds totalling $17-million since piloting an income share agreement (ISA) programme in 2016. With student debt currently weighing down the US economy — Bloomberg puts the amount at the end of 2018 at $1.5-trillion — students have had to find new ways to finance their studies. Traditional sources of funding — scholarships, bursaries, government grants and loans — are either unavailable or too expensive. Now private companies and some universities are putting in place agreements between students and investors that see the students’ education paid for in exchange for a certain fixed percentage of their future salary for a period after graduation. Purdue caps total payments at 2.5 times what a student borrowed. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.