At the centre of the questionable R111-million paid by the Eastern Cape health department to the Coega Development Corporation (CDC) is an arbitrator who scored multimillion-rand contracts from the corporation. This emerged as the Hawks in the province investigate allegations of fraud and corruption made by former health department infrastructure boss Mlamli Tuswa. He handed over his affidavit to the crime-fighting unit’s anti-corruption task team in East London last month. The Mail & Guardian has established that Stuart Riddle, one of the people on the arbitration panel who decided last year that the province’s health department should pay the CDC R150-million, had previously got lucrative contracts from the state-owned company.  Documents seen by the M&G show that Riddle’s company, Omega Civils, had been awarded two contracts in 2015 — one for close to R15-million for “the construction of miscellaneous civil engineering works” and another for R50-million to maintain roads and stormwater infrastructure. But Riddle denies a conflict of interest and that he should not have been part of the panel. “There were no contracts in place at the time. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.