Despite a hard line on immigrants by leaders of both the ANC and the Democratic Alliance (DA) in the run-up to the May 8 elections, the two parties moved this week to condemn the attacks on foreign nationals in Durban and to unlink their rhetoric from the outbreak of xenophobia. DA Johannesburg mayor Herman Mashaba had come under fire for his Twitter comments calling on the department of home affairs to “deal with’’ the large number of “uncontrolled’’ and undocumented foreigners in Alexandra, while the party’s hardline on border control in its manifesto for the national and provincial elections has also drawn criticism. Gauteng ANC premier David Makhura has proposed that foreign nationals in the province pay for health services, while Health Minister Dr Aaron Motsoaledi has blamed foreigners for draining the country’s health system and bringing it to the verge of collapse. President Cyril Ramaphosa, speaking at an ANC campaign event several weeks ago, said that foreign-owned businesses could no longer be allowed to operate in an unregulated manner. “Everybody just arrives and sets up businesses in our townships and rural areas without licences and permits,’’ Ramaphosa said. “We are going to bring this to an end.’’ At a media briefing in Johannesburg on Wednesday, DA leader Mmusi Maimane said the party was not anti-immigrant and did not want to stop foreign nationals from operating businesses. When the DA launched its elections campaign in September last year, Maimane put securing the country’s borders at the top of the party’s agenda. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.