Poised to put black modernist artists on the map, the Standard Bank Art Gallery took on the mammoth task of rescuing works from their exclusionary academic sanctuaries and brought them into the public domain in its current show A Black Aesthetic: A View of South African Artists (1970-1990), curated by art historian and head curator Dr Same Mdluli. Comprising an eclectic number of unknown and prominent visual artists working in different styles and mediums, the show stretches across history to bring the work together into what seems to be an atavistic colloquy on modern art. Mind you, throughout the 20th century, this dialogue was neither considered aesthetical nor modernist, but was instead classified using social Darwinist monikers such as “traditional”, “transitional”, “talismanic” or “township”, positioning African artists in a different temporal order. The power of what constituted “art” echoed the racial system that subtended it. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.