The South African Revenue Service (Sars) has not yet counted the costs of the national strike that hit the tax agency last week. The Public Servants Association (PSA) and the National Education, Health and Allied Workers Union (Nehawu) downed tools last Thursday for the first time in a decade — a move that hit customs and excise at border posts and Sars offices across the country. The strike came as Sars announced a shortfall in revenue collection for the fifth consecutive year on Monday, reaching R57.4-billion in 2018-2019. This marked an increase of R14.6‑billion on the existing shortfalls forecast in the February 2019 budget, which was expected to hit R42.8-billion. The strike also came as the institution remained in limbo after the disastrous term of axed commissioner Tom Moyane. But a day before the strike was due to begin, President Cyril Ramaphosa appointed former Sars deputy commissioner Edward Kieswetter as the new Sars boss. The PSA was first out of the starting blocks in accepting the three-year wage deal, with an increase of 8% in the first year and the consumer price index plus 2% in the two consecutive years thereafter, said the PSA’s Stefan Viljoen. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.