Art critiquing, similar to curating, is a sophisticated skill that requires understanding even when one is simply out of one’s depth with a specific area of artistic study. More than 20 years ago, artist, writer and teacher David Koloane said: “The visual arts in the South African context are often perceived as elitist and a specialist undertaking because they are associated with power and affluence.” He made this statement in a 1998 article titled Art Criticism for Whom? in which he explained why he shouldn’t bother participating in something that was virtually nonexistent in the broader context of the South African community. Much of his observations still resonate with the current disparity in art criticism in South Africa today, where the visual art landscape has paradoxically maintained a predominantly male-dominated and elitist space but also “democratised” the consumption of art with the inclusion of (Black) women. In addition, these days, anything can pass for art and anyone can become an artist or an art critic. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.