Former Housing Development Agency (HDA) board chairperson Mavuso Msimang has broken his silence on the scandal-ridden state entity, saying Human Settlements Minister Nomaindia Mfeketo caused the crisis about the board’s tenure by ignoring their reminders to timeously appoint new members. Msimang also believes the minister acted unlawfully by replacing the board with an administrator instead of allowing it to follow up on the investigations it had initiated into allegations of sexual harassment and financial irregularities. In December, Mfeketo placed the HDA under administration after the board had suspended several executives and senior managers, including chief executive officer (CEO) Pascal Moloi, pending an investigation into the allegations of financial irregularities. Several executives were also suspended over alleged sexual misconduct stemming from allegations that some were having workplace affairs with their junior employees. External investigators appointed by the board recommended that executives Mandla George, Mncedisi Mnisi and Lungisa Mapuma be charged for sexual harassment. The investigators also recommended that Moloi be charged for failing to act on complaints of sexual harassment from staff members. The agency was also ordered to return R2.3-billion in funds it had received from provinces to the treasury, but it was only able to hand over R1.5-billion because the balance had been allocated to contracts that, according to the auditor general, had been awarded irregularly. Msimang, an ANC stalwart and a vocal anti-corruption campaigner, said he was concerned that an impression had been created that the agency’s board had failed to investigate serious allegations of sexual harassment and financial irregularities. The board, he said, had initiated the investigations once it became aware of the allegations and had suspended Moloi and his colleagues to ensure that the complainants could safely give evidence. But the board was then replaced with the administrator, Nosipho Damasane, on the grounds that its term had expired. Msimang said the board’s term had been extended irregularly because Mfeketo had ignored their reminders about the expiry of its term. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.