Raiding pension coffers will do little to save embattled state-owned enterprises (SOEs) or public projects experts say, after plans were announced in the ANC’s election manifesto to investigate the introduction of prescribed assets on financial institutions’ funds “for investments in social and economic development”. The proposal, which surfaced at the ANC’s policy conference last year in June, is back on the agenda as the government grapples with ways to resolve power-utility Eskom’s acute financial distress. The SOE revealed at public hearings about its latest tariff increase application that it needs to raise R20-billion by March for its operations, according to a Business Day report. “The issue is current … because the hunt for solutions to Eskom will likely lead to a debate around the need to dictate that the asset management community and banks lend to Eskom to keep it afloat,” says Peter Attard Montalto, Intellidex’s head of capital markets research, in a note. Although Eskom is the largest risk to the national fiscus, other SOEs, such as the SABC and SAA, are also desperately seeking funding after years of mismanagement and corruption. But according to the head of the ANC’s economic transformation committee, Enoch Godongwana, it is “incorrect to link this debate to the SOEs at the moment. The ANC is having serious discussion on restructuring the SOEs.” The proposal of prescribed assets is related to funding infrastructure, he says. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.