The new national minimum wage has been a subject of contention from both business and labour and, although it is too soon to tell the effect of the new wage floor, the department of labour has received 26 applications for exemption. Of the applications, 24 were from businesses and two from households. The National Minimum Wage Act, which came into effect on January 1, stipulates that employers should pay their employees a minimum of R20 an hour or, in the case of domestic workers, R15, and farm workers, R18. Employers who prove they cannot afford to pay the minimum wage after passing various affordability tests considering the profitability, solvency and liquidity of a company, can get a 10% exemption. This means they pay R18 an hour for the general minimum wage, R13.50 for domestic workers and R16.20 for farm workers. The chief director of labour relations at the department, Thembinkosi Mkalipi, said the 10% threshold exemption was put in place to “protect the value of the minimum wage”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.