With elections on the horizon, political parties’ messages offer insight into their vision and leadership — and sometimes the lack thereof. In what could be interpreted as a melding of ideas, the Democratic Alliance and ANC are involved in a handbag fight over the DA’s most recent campaign slogan, “One South Africa for all”, which the ANC used in a tweet as their own. But a look at both parties’ slogans from the past illustrates sharp differences between their campaigns. Of the six national election slogans the ANC has produced since 1994, four contain the word “together”, including this year’s tagline, “Let’s grow South Africa together”. “It’s neither particularly innovative nor exciting,” says independent political analyst Daniel Silke of the ANC’s 2019 slogan. He says the ruling party has been consistent with their slogans. “A call for national unity is largely implied in these slogans and, as the ruling party, they always tend to be constructive and positive and uplifting.” In 1994 the Democratic Party, which later became the DA, led their campaign with the slogan “Freedom, federalism and free enterprise”, garnering 1.7% of the vote nationally. “That slogan was lost on black citizens. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.