If you wanted to see an organisation fit to manage the R2-trillion savings of state pensioners, then you would have done well to avoid the evidence led this week at the commission of inquiry investigating Public Investment Corporation (PIC) impropriety. In the case of one of its transactions, that of Ayo Technologies, which is allied to media mogul Iqbal Survé, about R4.3-billion was invested — apparently without the most basic investment checks being made. The public hearings, which started on Monday, covered the legislative, governance and some of the departmental structures of the PIC. This was meant to lay the foundation for later hearings, but the abrupt suspension of two senior employees on Tuesday morning, and the reasons given by the PIC, prompted the commission to start chipping away at some of the contentious issues that have appeared in media reports a lot sooner than anticipated. In focus after Tuesday’s events is the controversial Ayo investment. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.