Wednesday. eThekwini may­or and ANC chairperson Zan­dile Gumede’s delivery is somewhat robotic as she throws the city’s head of parks, recreation and culture, Thembinkosi Ngcobo, under the bus because of municipality’s plan to help former president Jacob Zuma out with his multimillion-rand legal bill by giving him a R25-million recording deal. I’m late for the mayor’s briefing, called in the face of the backlash from the public and opposition parties about the record deal, which came on the back of another city plan to spend R20-million on two statues. One of them is for Nxamalala, as Zuma is known to the faithful. The statue plan has already taken two in the chest and one in the head — at least until after elections — and now the city is stalling on naming the sculptor and implementing the project. I’d been struggling to drag myself away from the TV screen and former Bosasa operations head Angelo Agrizzi’s testimony before the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.