A detailed analysis has called into question the performance of the Government Employees’ Pension Fund and has highlighted what it deems to be persistent trouble at Africa’s largest pension fund. In research done for the Association for the Monitoring and Advocacy of Government Pensions (AMAGP), Christo van Dyk, a retired senior manager at the auditor general, warns of emerging problems at the fund, which could have major long-term consequences for its sustainability. His analysis builds on similar work done early last year on the fund’s financials, which the GEPF rejected outright. But the AMAGP, which consists of former and active civil servants and was set up in 2016, maintains that the problems remain. In a statement earlier this month, it questioned the fund’s sustainability given its declining yield on investments and an “astronomical rise” in costs. In his analysis, Van Dyk highlights, among other things, growing beneficiary liabilities alongside a widening contributions gap; the rising costs being paid by the fund under the current board of trustees; and the poor performance of the fund’s investments, particularly under the management of the Public Investment Corporation (PIC). These factors are contributing to a decline in the cash being generated by the fund, which should be used to pay out benefits. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.