South African National Civic Organisation (Sanco) deputy president Skhumbuzo Mpanza wants the Independent Police Investigative Directorate (Ipid) to investigate an attempt to arrest him and the organisation’s president Richard Mdakane on the eve of its elective conference in Johannesburg last weekend. The two Sanco leaders, who had been preparing to stand for election at the civic movement’s national conference, were involved in a stand-off with police from Durban who had arrived in Alexandra, Johannesburg, more than 500km away, to arrest them. But the plainclothes officers left after Sanco members refused to allow them to arrest the two, making an arrangement for Mdakane and Mpanza to appear in court in Durban on Monday on charges relating to the issuing of false invoices on behalf of Sanco and defrauding the organisation of R1.1-million. The charges were laid by suspended Sanco Eastern Cape leader Zukile Luyenge, a member of a rival faction in the organisation who had earlier instituted, and withdrawn, a high court action against the Sanco national leadership over alleged financial mismanagement and violations of its constitution. Mpanza and Mdakane appeared in court on Monday and were released on bail of R15 000 each and will appear in court again on March 29. The conference went ahead, and Mdakane and Mpanza were re-elected, despite members of a rival faction appointing their leaders as an interim task team to take over the organisation. Mpanza, who was elected as deputy president at the conference, said he believed the move to arrest them was aimed at collapsing the conference. “We will be reporting this matter to Ipid as it appears that state resources were being abused in a bid to humiliate us and collapse the conference. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.