An assassination plotted by the highest echelons of the apartheid regime is slowly being resurrected nearly 33 years after it sent shockwaves throughout the South African liberation movement. But now, as a spark of hope is ignited that the murders of the four men known as the Cradock Four might finally be investigated, the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) and the South African Police Service (SAPS) have been accused of suppressing apartheid-era investigations. In 1985, the apartheid state was thrown into panic when people from an obscure township called Lingelihle, next to Cradock in the Eastern Cape, wrested power from the government with protests that culminated in the resignation of members of the Lingelihle puppet council, which was dissolved. The protests were led by the Cradock Four, in a resistance movement aligned with the United Democratic Front. Fort Calata, Matthew Goniwe, Sparrow Mkhonto and Sicelo Mhlauli were executed by the apartheid police in an effort to suppress dissent. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.