Assume a corrupt politician somehow managed to get himself into the highest office in the land, holding sway with heavy hitters in the ruling party also benefiting from the largesse over which he presided. He could appoint cronies to key positions, such as in state-owned enterprises, the criminal prosecution authority and tax collection, and his supporters would applaud. There is a strong argument that governments are inept at best and corrupt at worst, so those holding this view would not be surprised that the scenario sketched above rolled out under the stewardship of former president Jacob Zuma. But what then is the role of the private sector and, in particular, that of private-sector watchdogs, such as auditors, which are meant to keep corruption in check? As the full horror of the extent of state capture during the Zuma years has unfolded, starting with the findings of former public protector Thuli Madonsela’s ‘State of Capture’ report, released in November 2016, the list of implicated private companies has continue to grow. Giant management consultancy firm McKinsey, which had global revenues of $10-billion last year, leads this list both in terms of the quantum (R1-billion) it took from the state- capture trough and the brazenness with which it shook down its client Eskom. After news of the R1-billion payment surfaced, McKinsey agreed to pay back the money, suggesting it could not begin to justify the payment. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.