A “dangerous” and powerful “boys’ club” is said to have run the Housing Development Agency (HDA) as its personal sexual fiefdom, harassing and exploiting female employees. The executives also had illicit relationships with employees at the state-owned entity, which works with provinces and municipalities to provide low-cost housing, allegedly promoting staff members in return for sexual favours. The damning findings are contained in a report by external investigators, commissioned by the HDA’s board last year after whistle-blowers approached it about sexual misconduct and financial and supply chain irregularities. The report recommends charging three top executives, Mandla George, Mncedisi Mnisi and Lungisa Mapuma, with sexual harassment. When contacted this week, George and Mnisi said they couldn’t comment because they had not seen the report. Mapuma declined to comment and said he found it strange that he had not been told by the HDA that the report was ready. According to the report, Mnisi denied “any allegations of sexual harassment, sexual relationships, indecent exposure or any form of sexual favouritism or misconduct”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.