Revelations that South Africa is losing an estimated R7-billion a year because of tax avoidance by multinationals has highlighted calls to rethink how countries tax these entities. International efforts to ensure that corporations are taxed where economic activities occur and reduce profit shifting to low-tax jurisdictions have been criticised as not doing enough to stop this, a practice that is particularly debilitating for developing countries. But there are alternatives, according to a tax justice advocate, and if regional leader South Africa was to explore these, it would pave the way for others. Widely publicised research released late last year by the SA-Tied (Southern Africa — Towards Inclusive Economic Development) project, suggests that 98% of the tax loss is linked to profit shifting by the biggest 10% of multinational corporations. It estimates that the country is losing about R7-billion in tax annually. About half the profits moved out of South Africa end up in Switzerland, the research found. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.