‘Are you sure? Fok, these leeskringe are usually a bunch of old white women,” Herman Lategan messages me in response to me telling him I would be attending the Johannesburg launch of his book, Opstokers, Fopdossers en Tweegatjakkalse, a collection of his biweekly columns in Rapport newspaper.  For the column, titled Woorde Wat Wip, Lategan would weave a story around a word that is rarely, if ever, used in the Afrikaans spoken today. As he correctly predicted, the launch, held in one the city’s affluent suburbs, is filled with well-heeled white folk — a world away from the one Lategan inhabits and that he documents with disarming and lyrical beauty in the collection. His world is one of drag queens, brown folk, long bus rides across the country, poor folk, bergies and the crazy characters that make up the fabric of Sea Point. Here, the author speaks candidly about his struggles with his predominantly Afrikaans audience, writing as a tool for change and Sea Point’s “complex and cruel” nature. During the discussion at the book launch, you mockingly quipped: “Daar is baie wit mense hierso [There a lot of white people here]” … The fault lines are there after all these years [laughs]. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.