A former senior department of water and sanitation official alleges the minister’s adviser and an MP tried to blackmail her to implicate former minister Nomvula Mokonyane in wrongdoing. The claim was made in an affidavit by former acting chief financial officer Mbalenhle Manukuza in an urgent case in the high court in Pretoria in December. The department wants the court to order the Government Employees Pension Fund to withhold the payment of pension benefits to Manukuza and another former chief financial officer, Rebeca Nkomo, until it has recovered more than R17-million the department said was irregularly paid to Fumile Advisory Services. Mokonyane was removed as minister of water and sanitation in February last year. She left behind a department where irregular expenditure had accelerated from R13-million in 2009 to R4-billion in 2017, according to the auditor general. Acting chief director of legal services Mapula Khuduga said in an affidavit that Manukuza improperly approved the payment to Fumile. Nkomo was involved in irregularly awarding the contract to Fumile to investigate fruitless and wasteful expenditure on certain projects, according to an internal audit report. When approached for comment, Nkomo said she had resigned and her responses had been sent to the department. In Manukuza’s answering affidavit, she said the department was taking her to court because of her refusal “to falsely implicate the former minister [Mokonyane] and former acting director general [Sifiso Mkhize] in wrongdoing”. Manukuza claims that, in May last year, Dumisani Lupungela, current Minister Gugile Nkwinti’s adviser, phoned her. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.