The ANC in the Western Cape will choose President Cyril Ramaphosa to be the face of its campaign to wrest control from the Democratic Alliance in this year’s provincial elections. The party in the province has been without a permanent provincial chairperson for two years now and has been mired in chaos since the suspension of former ANC chairperson Marius Fransman on sexual misconduct charges. The party has also had to redo its provincial list after some names were left off the final list sent by the province to the list conference this weekend. The error was only discovered after the delegates had already left the conference venue. Provincial delegates initially convened in early December, but they were summoned back to Wellington to redo the list on December 27. Speaking before the ANC’s national election manifesto launch in eThekwini, Western Cape ANC secretary Faiez Jacobs said the party would not put up a premier candidate to campaign in the only province it doesn’t govern. “There will be only one face of this campaign, and that will be the president’s face. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.