An Eastern Cape high court has ordered a class action for teachers in the province who were employed in teaching posts paid for by school governing bodies (SGBs) when they should have been paid by the provincial education department. The high court in Makhanda (formerly Grahamstown) made the order early this month after seven teachers, represented by the Legal Resources Centre (LRC), approached the court last year. They had been in temporary posts paid by SGBs between 2010 and 2014. The court application arose after the failure by the provincial department to appoint teachers to schools in the province as part of its annual post-provisioning process, which involves determining the number of teaching posts each school is entitled to and then appointing teachers to those positions. But, according to the founding affidavit by the first applicant in the court case, Arthur Frans Grootboom, the provincial department of education had failed to appoint teachers to the allocated teaching posts between 2010 and 2017. Schools that had a shortage had to appoint teachers using school fees or money allocated by the department for other purposes. “The schools did so despite the fact that the department bore an obligation to pay for such teachers and had undertaken to do so by allocating the posts concerned,” reads the affidavit. The first part of the application dealt with the underpayment of teachers by the SGBs. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.