More than 3 00 police trainees have not had DNA samples taken, yet these are needed to stop criminals from entering the South African Police Service (SAPS). The trainees joined SAPS academies last year and graduated in December. They are now serving their 12-month probation period. Background and fingerprint checks have been done, but DNA swabbing also helps to identify anyone linked to evidence gathered at crime scenes. Although Police Minister Bheki Cele’s office attempted to downplay the failure to take DNA samples, saying they could be taken at any stage during training, police members and an MP who was involved in drafting new legislation to introduce mandatory DNA sampling of the police described it as “outrageous”, “disheartening” and “gross negligence”. The Criminal Law (Forensic Procedures) Amendment Act of 2013 requires that samples be taken from all police members and added to an elimination index on the national database so that the DNA of any members can be quickly identified if it’s picked up at crime scenes. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.