President Cyril Ramaphosa this week cleared his first hurdle in winning over the ANC in KwaZulu-Natal — the fiercest ­backers of his predecessor, Jacob Zuma — by addressing the party’s January 8 celebrations in Durban without a major incident. But, despite a political eggshell dance on Ramaphosa’s part — including a public homage to Zuma, who joined him on the podium at the main rally at the Ohlange Institute in Inanda on Tuesday — he was still subjected to Zuma’s supporters chanting the ­former president’s name at the end of his address. Although the chanting was quickly halted by ANC elections head Fikile Mbalula, the master of ceremonies at the rally, it has raised concerns that Zuma supporters may use Ramaphosa’s address at the party’s election manifesto launch at Durban’s Moses Mabhida Stadium on Saturday to humiliate him publicly for Zuma’s recall. It also prompted ANC KwaZulu-Natal chairperson Sihle Zikalala, who accompanied Ramaphosa for most of the week he spent campaigning in the province, to ask party members to “keep quiet and listen” during the head of state’s speeches. Ramaphosa will unveil the ANC manifesto for the May election, the toughest it has had to fight since 1994, on Saturday. Organisers have thrown a huge amount of resources into mobilising an 80 000-strong crowd to pack the ­stadium. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.