The troubled Community Scheme Ombud Service (CSOS) has been asked to lay fraud and attempted theft charges against a service provider who deposited the agency’s R20-million surplus funds into an Absa account under his own company’s name. This is according to a forensic report into the CSOS, which also recommended that the agency should recover R80-million that was “recklessly” paid into now defunct VBS Mutual Bank by the same service provider, Gundos Pty, owned by Ralliom Razwinane. According to the report, Gundos Pty was not an authorised financial services provider, as required by law. Razwinane was one of the individuals who received gratuitous payments “without any just or legal cause” from VBS. According to the South African Reserve Bank’s report, compiled by Terry Motau SC, Razwinane received R24 224 198. The forensic report by Knowles Husain Lindsay Attorneys, which was presented to the former CSOS board last month, said the payments were not authorised by the board. The board was made aware that the Absa payment was done by a third party in August last year after a subcommittee investigated Absa’s insistence that it did not have an account in the CSOS’s name. According to the report, the R20-million deposit of the agency’s surplus funds, which was made in January last year, meant that the state institution had no direct access to the funds. The report said: “CSOS does not have a contractual right to receive the cash invested in Absa Bank due to the fact that the investment account is not in the name of CSOS and the money is therefore not a financial asset of CSOS … The prudent authority’s investigator [advocate Motau] does have the powers [as we understand it] to access those records and to determine whether any criminal or other illegal actions accompanied the opening of the Absa investment.” The customer was reflected by Absa as Gundo Pty and Gundo’s reference was reflected as Razwinane. “Adv Motau’s team may thus very well have an interest in investigating how the Absa investment ended up in an Absa account held by Gundo Pty,” according to the report. The CSOS was set up to resolve administrative disputes in schemes such as sectional title and homeowners’ associations. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.