Reserve Bank governor Lesetja Kganyago on Thursday said the bank’s mandate already included a focus on “balanced and sustainable growth”, which was enshrined in the Constitution. “Anyone who says that the SARB [South African Reserve Bank] must focus on growth has clearly not read the Constitution, because the Constitution says what we do is in the interests of balanced and sustainable growth,” he said. “The fathers and mothers of our Constitution took the view that, for you to have balanced and sustainable growth, you need price stability.” His remarks follow the release of the ANC’s election manifesto, which said the SARB “must pursue a flexible monetary policy regime, aligned with the objectives of the second phase of transition”. “Without sacrificing price stability, monetary policy must take into account other objectives such as employment creation and economic growth,” it said. The pronouncement follows on from a policy resolution taken at the ANC conference at Nasrec in December 2017 to nationalise the central bank, which was seen at the time as a concession to populists in the ruling party and the faction aligned to former president Jacob Zuma. An independent central bank was one of the underpinnings of the Constitution, Kganyago said, and to change its mandate would require a change to the Constitution. He also distinguished between the debate on the SARB’s mandate and questions about its nationalisation and the role of private shareholders. When legislation to nationalise the bank and do away with its private shareholders was considered by Parliament, the SARB would participate in that process, he said, although it would do so “with the clear intention” of protecting the bank’s mandate and its independence. He welcomed comments by President Cyril Ramaphosa and Finance Minister Tito Mboweni that the independence of the bank was sacrosanct. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.