As summer 2019 kicked in, the Democratic Alliance’s two most prominent black leaders resigned in a move many saw as pre-empting the house coup already under way.Bongani Madondo says the meltdown amid racial witch-hunting portends the beginning of the end of white liberalism itself A poet of profound compassion, a voice festooned with spiritual ache on one hand, and the most wondrous of lilting cadences on the other, Don “Zinga” Mattera once wrote that “memory is a weapon”. The son of an Italian man — assigned the status of a white man in this country, and then based at Sophiatown’s Red Bus depot — and a Motswana domestic worker, Mattera would have a personal insight, experience even, about what that meant, born, as it were, out of a love song, a marriage of the West and the South, of black and white. He would have had an acute understanding of the condition, then, of being a complex young African soul flowered in Western Township and growing up in Sophiatown, twin black enclaves a mere stone’s throw from white Johannesburg and yet virtually nonexistent to the majority of its otherwise well-meaning liberal dwellers. This is not about Mattera. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.