Embattled deputy national director of public prosecutions Nomgcobo Jiba told the Mokgoro inquiry that she felt betrayed by the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) when she was prosecuted for fraud and perjury in relation to her decision to authorise a prosecution for racketeering against retired KwaZulu-Natal Hawks head Johan Booysen. Jiba was giving evidence at the inquiry, chaired by retired judge Yvonne Mokgoro, into her fitness for her post as deputy prosecutions boss, after she was rebuked by several judges in high-profile and politically sensitive cases. The inquiry is also looking into the fitness for office of Lawrence Mrwebi, head of the NPA’s Specialised Commercial Crime Unit. Jiba was criticised for her handling of the Booysen case. Booysen successfully went to the high court to set aside his racketeering charge. The charges related to the so-called “Cato Manor death squad” after the now- discredited exposé by the Sunday Times of alleged “extrajudicial killings” of 28 people by the Durban organised crime unit, whose office was in Cato Manor. Booysen has testified before Mokgoro and repeated what he argued before Judge Trevor Gorven in a KwaZulu-Natal high court in 2014: when Jiba authorised charges against him, not one of the statements she said she had relied on to do so linked him to the crime — or to any crime. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.