If you have been paying even the slightest attention to environmental issues, you will know that microplastics — also called nanoplastics which includes microbeads — are polluting both fresh and seawater and finding their way into our food chain. But you possibly don’t know that some of the biggest cosmetic brands contain microbeads. These include Johnson & Johnson’s Clean & Clear Advantage and Soothe Daily Scrub, which contains polyethylene; Pond’s Flawless Radiance, which includes polyquaternium-7; and there is nylon-12 in Revlon’s Colorstay makeup, L’Oréal’s Infallible Matte Foundation and Maybelline’s Fit Me! Matte+Poreless Foundation. Microplastics are defined as being less than five millimeters in diameter and microbeads are put into products such as exfoliants, toothpaste, shampoo, body wash, moisturisers, makeup and sunscreens. Hardly visible to the naked eye, they flow from the bathroom drain into the sewers and then into rivers and ultimately the sea. Identifying the presence of microbeads can be complex, says the director of the environmental consultancy the Green House, Pippa Notten. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.