Do you remember the Three Course Dinner chewing gum from Willy Wonka? How about Bertie Bott’s Every Flavour Beans in Harry Potter? Packing such enormous flavour into a tiny morsel sounds like the work of fiction, but intensely flavoured microgreens are real ingredients now appearing on the tables of Jo’burg’s trendy bistros and fine dining restaurants. They look delicate, even insignificant, but broccoli microgreens actually taste like broccoli, mustard microgreens taste like Dijon mustard and pea shoots taste like fresh peas. Urban gardener and chef Elisha Madzivadondo first started growing microgreens in 2013. After more than 10 years of working as a butler in the affluent Cape Town suburb of Camps Bay, Madzivadondo resigned to follow his true ambition. “I loved working as a butler,” he says, “but I wanted to follow my passion for food and keeping people healthy.” Madzivadondo grows microgreens and sprouts in a small urban garden in Pinelands, Cape Town. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.