President Cyril Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation address marks the official start of the parliamentary year but MPs are not expected to do much for the duration of their term. At a meeting of Parliament’s programming committee last week, it was announced that the legislature will rise on March 21, officially relieving MPs of their duties and allowing them to campaign for the elections. There’s no plan yet for the National Assembly or National Council of Provinces to debate and vote on major legislation for the rest of the term. Instead, parliamentary committees will spend much of their time putting the final touches to reports to be handed over to the next Parliament. The new term will start 10 days after the election scheduled for May. So MPs will probably while away what parliamentary time is left in heckling each other and use the parliamentary podium as an election stump — which is exactly what happened during the environmental affairs committee’s inquiry, held this week, into the Clifton Fourth Beach saga. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.