Controversial coloured nationalist group Gatvol Capetonians will not be contesting the 2019 elections because it says the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC) does not like its name. The trio of men always seen in black T-shirts emblazoned with the words “Gatvol Capetonians”, call themselves a Cape Flats grassroots movement. They’re adamant that not even prudish IEC officials can stop them from throwing their weight behind other political formations who they say share their values of a “Wexit” — Western Cape exit from the rest of South Africa. “Gatvol only means fed-up,” group spokesperson Fadiel Adams say. Several political movements in the Western Cape are calling for greater autonomy for the province. Adams says they’re pushing for an independent Cape but want it done peacefully and legally for the betterment of all people in the region. “I’m not going to take offence if you call me a coloured nationalist because nobody cares about the so-called coloured people. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.