Former ANC MP Vytjie Mentor’s refusal to yield to blows knocking her credibility this week has left the Zondo commission of inquiry into state capture with the dilemma of possibly having to embark on the staggering task of proving her claims. This week Mentor became the first of the commission’s witnesses to be cross-examined and, despite critical gaps in her claims and evidence contradicting them, she stood by her testimony. Mentor’s main allegation is that the Gupta patriarch, Ajay, offered her the job of public enterprises minister at a clandestine meeting at the family’s Saxonwold compound sometime in 2010. She has also alleged that former president Jacob Zuma emerged to calm her down after she rejected the offer. During her testimony in August last year, she conceded that she found it difficult to distinguish between the Gupta brothers — specifically Ajay and Atul. She also admitted to having mistakenly named Brian Hlongwa in her 2017 book No Holy Cows as having accompanied the Guptas on a department of trade and industry trip to China in 2010. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.