When the chief executive of an enterprise valued at R160-billion announces his or her intention to quit, good succession planning normally requires a long period of notice. Absa chief executive Maria Ramos’s decision this week to quit with just a month’s notice led to immediate speculation that she is quitting for another job, such as a heavy-hitting position in the government. Absa says it will take up to 10 months to replace her. Broadcast journalist Bruce Whitfield speculated on Twitter that Ramos was heading to the South African Revenue Service (Sars) to fix the destruction wrought by Tom Moyane and his well-paid private sector advisers. Ramos has run Absa for 10 years, Transnet for five years and the national treasury as director general for seven years, and so is up to the Sars job. But there is potentially a bigger job in the offing. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni, who was appointed after the sudden departure of Nhlanhla Nene in October, told economists earlier this month in Johannesburg he won’t be around for Cabinet duty after May. The question is: Will he last that long? He was conspicuously absent at Team SA’s line-up at its media briefing in Davos. President Cyril Ramaphosa, backed by his ministers of energy, health, economic development, public enterprises and international relations, was asked: “Where is the minister of finance?” He responded: “He is in another session. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.