About R80-million said to have been illegally invested in VBS Mutual Bank by rogue officials at the state-owned Community Schemes Ombud Service (CSOS) was actually deposited into an FNB corporate cheque account belonging to the now-insolvent bank, a forensic investigation into the transaction has revealed. From there it was allegedly siphoned off and dispersed to such an extent that “it would not even be worth mounting a legal challenge for its return”, an insider with direct knowledge said.  “It was in a VBS FNB account and not invested [and] that is why that R80-million is not in advocate Terry Motau’s report. What I have learnt now is that they [CSOS and VBS officials] took it because it was not known [as an investment] by VBS. “It was a scam,” said the insider, who asked not to be named. This latest revelation is also contained in an affidavit filed by CSOS acting chief ombud Ndivhuo Rabuli in an application before the high court in Johannesburg.  The CSOS wants the court to issue an urgent order to prevent any withdrawal of funds from the FNB account pending the court’s ruling on the second part of the relief, which seeks to have the courts declare the transfer invalid and therefore not part of VBS’s insolvent estate, and order its return to CSOS. It also wants the court to order the bank to release account statements so it can verify the balance and transactions on the account, arguing that public interest over public funds trumped client confidentiality. CSOS has cited FirstRand Bank Ltd, VBS and its liquidator Anoosh Rooplal as the first, second and third respondents in the application.  “The premise of CSOS’s claim against FNB for repayment of its funds is that those funds are owned by FNB and that, owing to the fraud, VBS has no right to the funds. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.