Increasing demands by failing state-owned enterprises, rising debt servicing costs and an ever-expanding public sector wage bill have left the government in a tight fiscal position but, despite this, the state forgoes more than 4% of gross domestic product (GDP) because of preferential tax expenditure. This is tax relief provided by targeted exemptions, deductions or credits. This is also used to encourage taxpayers to undertake activities prioritised by the government, such as socioeconomic development. According to the 2019 Budget Review, for the most recent figures available, this amounted to about R209-billion in 2016-2017, or 4.7% of GDP, and should amount to about 16% of the total R1.3-trillion expected to be raised from tax this year. In 2016-2017, tax exemptions on pensions accounted for the largest amount — R72-billion; zero-rated goods amounted to R56-billion; and R28-billion went to the development of the motor vehicle industry. In the 2018-2019 financial year, weak economic growth accounted for an estimated R8-billion shortfall in personal income tax because of job losses, low wage settlements and reduced bonuses. There was a shortfall of about R12-billion in corporate income tax, largely because of reduced production in mining and quarrying and an underperforming financial sector. Given that there have been substantial tax increases over the past four years, the treasury did not increase tax in any category to limit the negative effect on economic growth, but personal income brackets were not adjusted for inflation, which would make for increased tax collection as salaries increased. “Since 2015-2016, measures have been introduced to raise additional amounts of R16.8-billion, R18.1-billion, R28-billion and R36-billion per year,” according to the document. But other things are eating into government revenue. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.