Thursday. It’s been a long, tough and maddeningly unproductive week. Repeated taxi trips to court in that hellish inferno that is Pietermaritzburg and a morning spent trying to get blood from a stone while nervously looking over my shoulder in Glebelands Hostel have resulted in little more than driving my anxiety levels through the roof. My attempts to get an inside view of the ANC’s lists for the national and provincial parliaments have been just as ineffective. Those who know whether or not the governing party will summon the courage to cull the state capture brigade and other comrades with pending corruption cases from its candidates for the May elections aren’t talking.  At least not to me. There’s none of the usual leaks, no WhatsApped lists, no whispering backlash from the comrades who got left out or their backers, so one assumes the ANC process is yet to be concluded. The process of screening the would-be parliamentarians must be a nightmare for the ANC’s ethics committee and the others tasked with ensuring that all the candidates make it “through the eye of a needle”. It’s a big job: events in the recent past have left a fair number of the comrades with question marks hanging over their integrity. Quite a few appear to be more suited to 15 years in Westville Prison or Sun City rather than another term in Parliament, or Cabinet, if the testimony before the Zondo commission by former Bosasa operations head Angelo Agrizzi and his colleagues, and earlier witnesses who testified about the reach of the Gupta family,  is anything to go by. Many of the comrades named thus far made the cut at the ANC’s nominations conference and are on the draft list, which is currently being vetted. Will the ANC field the “ton of chicken” detachment, to use Bosasa’s terminology for those it bought and paid for in the former liberation movement and government?  Will they dump the alleged recipients of cash-stuffed Louis Vuitton bags, crates of fine whisky and cut-up lambs? Agrizzi and associates made sure they issued enough of their personalised Bosasa cards to key people on both sides of the ANC divide to ensure that they had their claws into both factions.  Factor in the fightback by former president Jacob Zuma and his supporters and the chances of a clean-out of the lists ahead of May are suddenly looking slim. The party still has some time. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.