The Association of Mineworkers and Construction Union (Amcu) is at loggerheads with other trade unions about its protracted wage strike at gold mine Sibanye-Stillwater. In July last year, Amcu, the National Union of Mineworkers (NUM), Solidarity and the United Association of South Africa (Uasa) began annual wage negotiations. This resulted in all the unions except Amcu accepting a R700-a-month increase in the first and second years and R825 in the third year for some categories of employees. But Amcu is adamantly insisting on a R1 000 wage hike. The union has been picketing since November 14 and has been accused of violence and intimidation — allegations it denies. “Amcu has the right to go on strike, but our concern is that they are doing that [while] intimidating our members,” said NUM spokesperson Luphert Chilwane. “As a peaceful union, it is really uncalled for for workers to fight each other instead of fighting the real enemy, which is the employer.” The mining house said that, since the strike began, seven people have died. There have also been reports of workers being attacked and intimidated. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.