President Cyril Ramaphosa has told Parliament that Finance Minister Tito Mboweni will give details about a treasury bailout for Eskom during next week’s budget speech. Ramaphosa was responding to Tuesday’s debate by MPs on his State of the Nation address (Sona). Earlier this week Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan told Parliament that the power utility was in crisis. Almost concurrently, parts of South Africa were flung into darkness for hours as Eskom reintroduced load-shedding. The department’s acting director general, Thuto Shomang, told members of the parliamentary portfolio committee that Eskom was technically insolvent and in its current trajectory it would collapse by April. He later added a disclaimer, saying it was likely the ailing state-owned enterprise would get a bailout from the treasury. The department, however, issued a corrected presentation late on Wednesday, removing any reference to Eskom’s insolvency, or the fact that it could cease to exist. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.