Fittingly, human rights advocate Tembeka Ngcukaitobi (“The land wars of 2019: Analysing the EFF and ANC manifestos”) argues that, “granting the power of land redistribution to the state, as the people of Zimbabwe have witnessed, simply encourages corruption, arbitrary conduct and lack of accountability … in reimagining the institutions of land reform [in South Africa], the most vital element is the rule of law”. That he should argue along these lines is no surprise for the additional reason that he is the author of The Land Is Ours: Black Lawyers and the Birth of Constitutionalism in South Africa, which, according to the publisher, “tells the story of South Africa’s first black lawyers, who operated in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries”, and who, “in an age of aggressive colonial expansion, land dispossession and forced labour … believed in a constitutional system that respected individual rights and freedoms, and … used the law as an instrument against injustice”. The book is “particularly relevant in light of current calls to scrap the Constitution and its protections of individual rights”. How perplexing, then, that in his article Ngcukaitobi should argue that “[m]any developing economies across the globe have now accepted that title deeds do not constitute the magic wand to the problem of insecure tenure to land” and that title deeds “do not solve the problem, and in some instances compound it”. South Africa’s history since 1994 could be said to demonstrate that constitutionalism born of universal franchise is not a “magic wand” either and, to the extent that the government has wreaked havoc with the state at the cost mostly of the poor, may even be said to have compounded South Africa’s challenges. But these are not good arguments for dispensing with the rule of law. If it is uncontroversial that massive dispossession in recent Southern African (post-1600) history disrupted and narrowed the lives of millions, it is every bit as uncontroversial that property rights are the demonstrable anchor of human rights and freedoms in all free societies. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.