State-owned energy company PetroSA has offered the use of its infrastructure in Mossel Bay to Total in the hope that it will get feedstock from the French oil company’s new offshore gas find off the southern coast. This depends on how Total decides to develop the gas condensate it discovered, said Bongani Sayidini, PetroSA’s acting chief executive. Total and its partners announced this past Thursday that a significant gas condensate discovery had been made in Block 11B/12B in the Outeniqua Basin, 175km off the southern coast. The discovery has been called a “game-changer” and “catalytic” by President Cyril Ramaphosa and industry experts, who say the find could have a material effect on the country’s economy. One immediate potential beneficiary is the loss-making PetroSA, whose gas-to-liquid plant in Mossel Bay has been running below at least 50% of its capacity for more than two years, according to Sayidini. The state-owned entity’s infrastructure also includes pipelines close to Total’s offshore find. Sayidini said PetroSA has reached out to Total and expressed its interest in receiving feedstock from the French oil company. He said PetroSA also highlighted that its offshore infrastructure could “be potentially enabling for Total and ensure that [it] moves quicker in monetising this gas and condensate discovery because there is already infrastructure they could tap into”. Should Total piggyback on PetroSA’s infrastructure, Sayidini said the time taken to go from exploration to commercial fuel production could be “significantly cut” from the estimated eight years by possibly as much as half. Total plans to drill four more wells in the area, and chief executive Patrick Pouyanné told Reuters that it is estimated there is about one billion barrels of gas condensate in the block. On whether the struggling state-owned entity would be able to afford the gas provided by Total, Sayidini said PetroSA was already processing and importing gas at market rates, which indicated that it can afford the feedstock at the “right price”. Sayidini said that condensate is a high-cost commodity on its own and, when imported, the price was compounded by logistical costs. Last year the auditor general expressed concern about PetroSA’s ability to remain a going concern, after consecutive years of substantial losses. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.