‘Hidden in its walled garden within a stone’s throw of the Champs Elysées and La Défense, the Saint James offers its club members and guests a unique setting to hold a private meeting and to unwind,” reads the homepage of the Saint James Club in Paris, described as “a confidential place” and housed in a 19th-century bourgeois hotel.  It was here that Peter Fourie, the newly appointed managing director of a South African cement subsidiary, was summoned in 1998 to meet executives from parent company Lafarge. Fourie testified at South Africa’s Competition Tribunal that Michel Rose, Lafarge’s chief operating officer from 2004 to 2008, and Alain Bourguignon, a member of Lafarge’s executive committee until 2016, were at the meeting in Paris in 1998. At the time, a fierce price war was taking place in the South African cement industry, and Lafarge was unhappy because its South African subsidiary market share had dropped by more than 15%. The Lafarge executives explained to Fourie the “global rules” of the cement industry. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.