There is a slim chance that the budget delivered on Wednesday by Finance Minister Tito Mboweni may be just enough to stave off any immediate action by credit ratings agency Moody’s. But whether the country will still be holding on to its last investment grade rating by the end of the year will depend on evidence that the substantial bailout the treasury has allocated to Eskom will result in meaningful change, economists say. In his speech, Mboweni revealed a marked deterioration in the government’s finances, driven by poor economic growth, shrinking revenue and additional spending pressures. The biggest of these is the R69-billion Eskom will get in the coming three years to service its debt. But more support, amounting to about R150-billion in the coming 10 years, is likely to be needed after this, a treasury official confirmed, although this will depend on other factors such as what tariff increases Eskom gets and the implementation of its turnaround strategy. The real effect of the extended assistance for Eskom is evidenced in the forecast of the country’s debt-to-gross domestic product ratio, which will peak at 60.2% of GDP by 2023-2024. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.