As Edcon, the owner of Jet, Edgars and CNA, fights to keep its doors open, it appears that it is is the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), with its access to a R2-trillion war chest, that might make or break yet another embattled company. But views are divided over whether the PIC, currently under scrutiny in the Mpati commission because of its investment decisions, should help to prolong the life of a company that has battled to cope with the changing retail environment, thanks to stiff local and international competition and the rise of online shopping. The failure to save Edcon on the other hand would have “catastrophic” consequences for the clothing and textiles manufacturing value chain, according to Etienne Vlok of the South African Clothing and Textile Workers’ Union’s (Sactwu). Not to mention the knock-on effects it could have for the broader economy, such at the commercial property sector, he said ­— in which Edcon accounts for 10% of shopping centre space. There is some logic to the PIC helping to recapitalise Edcon, some investment experts argue, if only to innoculate other parts of its portfolio against possible contagion if Edcon closes shop. The PIC manages about R2-trillion in assets on behalf of the Government Employees’ Pension Fund (GEPF) and other social welfare agencies, such as the Unemployment Insurance Fund and the Compensation Fund. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.