The appointment of the Public Investment Corporation’s (PIC) new board, after members resigned en masse last week, should follow an inclusive process, say unionists. Finance Minister Tito Mboweni has begun the search for an interim board for the biggest asset manager on the continent and organised labour says those appointed should preferably not have political connections, be without any stain of corruption and fit for the job. Worker representatives are concerned about how the PIC is managing their investments. They say the process should be consultative and labour should have a seat at the table. “If [Mboweni] decides to appoint without being transparent, without giving effect to the PIC Act, which clearly states he must consider depositors, which happen to be us, we will interdict the new board,” said Tahir Maepa, the spokesperson of the Public Servants’ Association. The Act, which gives the minister the power to appoint the board in consultation with Cabinet, says the minister must have “due regard for the nominations submitted by the depositors”. Maepa said the minister should consult workers and provide clear, public criteria about how the interim board will be appointed. The nonexecutive board members of the PIC, including the chairperson, Deputy Finance Minister Mondli Gungubele, resigned at the beginning of February, saying recent events and allegations of corruption levelled against at least four of its members had brought its credibility and integrity into question. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.