The ANC’s decision to disband its North West provincial executive committee (PEC) was unlawful, the high court in Johannesburg ruled this week. On Wednesday, Judge Fayeeza Kathree-Setiloane handed down a judgment that ordered the reinstatement of the PEC and the return of North West’s erstwhile premier Supra Mahumapelo as its chairperson. The PEC should be reinstated within two days of the judgment, the court ordered. The appointment of the provincial task team after the PEC’s disbandment was declared unlawful and the ANC was ordered to pay the legal costs of the two high court bids. The judgment contains a stinging rebuke of the party’s consultative process leading up to the disbandment of the PEC last year and found that it did not comply with the ANC’s procedures. The judgment describes the ANC’s failure to consult the four branches that voted in the PEC as “fatal”. “It is clear from the undisputed facts that these so-called consultative meetings did not meet the standard of procedural fairness as they were not properly convened,” the judgment reads. “In short, the so-called consultative meetings were shambolic, chaotic and rowdy.” The judgment also describes the dissolution of the PEC a “drastic and draconian measure”. In August last year, the ANC’s national executive committee (NEC) confirmed the disbandment of the North West PEC, after a protracted crisis in the province. In April, the province was gripped by protests and people throughout the North West called on the ANC to remove Mahumapelo. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.