This week’s arrests by the Hawks of those people linked to money laundering at Bosasa are likely to be just the first in a far bigger case. The charges stem directly from a 2009 special investigating unit (SIU) report into Bosasa and the department of correctional services. Although the National Prosecuting Authority received the report a decade ago, the matter was not dealt with. But the charges reveal only a snippet of an allegedly much larger scheme by the firm to generate “clean” cash needed to pay off state officials. All those arrested by the Hawks on Wednesday — former Bosasa chief operating officer Angelo Agrizzi, the company’s former chief financial officer, Andries van Tonder, former department of correctional services chief financial officer Patrick Gillingham, former Bosasa senior manager Frans Vorster and Bosasa chief accountant Carlos Bonifacio — face money-laundering charges. These relate to the favours allegedly paid by Bosasa to Gillingham and the complex scheme to conceal their true source. Gillingham’s confidant, former prisons commissioner Linda Mti, who handed himself over to the authorities on Thursday, has not been charged with money laundering, despite allegedly receiving almost R1-million in favours. Gillingham and Mti have been accused of aiding Bosasa’s monopoly of department tenders. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.