Thousands of people crowded Muizenberg’s Sunrise beach this week to see the South African National Defence Force showcase its firepower. While those on the beach watched the fireworks-like display of rockets, guns and attack helicopters in awe, others were less than impressed with this year’s Armed Forces Day activities. Residents of nearby settlements as well as the Democratic Alliance and the Inkatha Freedom Party have criticised the event. The beach is within walking distance of areas such as Lavender Hill, Seawinds and Vrygrond, which are affected by high rates of gang and gun violence, and activists say children suffering from trauma have had to deal with the sound of military guns and rockets. The 2017-2018 crime statistics in the Steenberg policing district, under which Lavender Hill falls, show there were 85 murders, many of them gun-related, and 87 arrests in connection with the illegal possession of guns and ammunition. Speaking during the event, as rocket flares and inert rounds rained down on the False Bay coastline, Lavender Hill activist Lucinda Evans said some children were visibly distressed. “Our children have been exposed to so much gunfire and so much trauma that the backfire of a car’s exhaust pipe makes them flinch. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.