With the country thrashing out a solution to its Eskom problems, foreign investors appear to have taken a renewed shine to South Africa, given the improved performance of government bonds and the rand in recent weeks. But experts claim it has less to do with local efforts to allay investor unease or address concerns about the utility, deemed the biggest threat to the economy, and more to do with global events. Despite the start of load-shedding late last year, indications of mounting Eskom losses and lacklustre economic data, government 10-year bond yields have steadily dropped from more than 9% in October to about 8.5% at the start of February. Meanwhile, the currency was the best emerging market performer in January, gaining 8%, according to information from Stanlib. There has been a sweeping change in sentiment towards emerging markets in the past few months, said Elena Ilkova, the fixed income and credit strategist of Rand Merchant Bank. “The more favourable emerging market growth outlook, combined with the change in the [United States] Federal Reserve’s hawkish stance, has seen most emerging markets benefit. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.