On the morning of November 16 2017, the assistant portfolio manager of the Public Investment Corporation (PIC), Victor Seanie, was asked to attend an introductory meeting with Ayo Technology Solutions. He could not foresee that it would trigger a chain of events that would lead to him being suspended little more than a year later. Despite the short notice, it was not an unusual meeting; the PIC meets companies that want its support when they plan to list on the JSE. Seanie and the head of listed investments, Fidelis Madavo, were suspended by the corporation last week, during the first week of the commission of inquiry into impropriety at the PIC. An internal investigation instituted by the PIC in December found that the pair had “clearly” flouted the governance and approval processes of the state asset manager in the Ayo transaction. On Tuesday, Seanie denied these allegations and told the inquiry that it was his last hope to salvage his name and professional integrity. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.