The South African Revenue Service (Sars) is still reeling from former commissioner Tom Moyane’s years of tenure, and the residual problems, compounded by a tough economic environment, have resulted in significant shortfalls. But his ghosts will be exorcised if Finance Minister Tito Mboweni has his way. He made it abundantly clear that not paying taxes will not be tolerated. “So please do render unto Caesar what belongs to Caesar because Caesar can break your bones,” he said at a media briefing on Wednesday before his budget speech to Parliament. The revenue service, much like the rest of the country’s public entities, is on a path of renewal and the focus is on improving its efficiency by implementing the most urgent recommendations made by the commission of inquiry led by retired judge Robert Nugent. At a time when the government is desperately in need of money, Mboweni announced that revenue collection for 2018-2019 is expected to be R15.4-billion less than what was estimated in the medium-term budget policy statement in October. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.