Load-shedding may extend into the coming weeks, according to Eskom’s own forecasts, because the utility faces a confluence of factors that have again plunged the country into regular rounds of darkness. The department of public enterprises has warned of Eskom’s severe liquidity problems, which, if not resolved, means it could run out of cash by April. A major contributing cause of the current outages is the poor performance of Eskom’s two new power stations, Medupi and Kusile, which were intended to come onstream with additional capacity and provide a buffer for Eskom’s existing coal fleet, which is aging, requires extensive maintenance and is prone to unplanned outages. This is according to Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, who told parliamentarians on Wednesday that Medupi and Kusile were supposed to provide “the extra energy space” to allow old units to be taken down for repairs. Instead, the power stations are years behind on their completion dates and costs have increased exponentially since they were first announced. In addition, despite being the newest members of Eskom’s fleet, the stations are not performing as expected, achieving only 40% reliability, according to the department of public enterprises. In a presentation given to the portfolio committee on public enterprises, the department detailed how costs to build Medupi and Kusile have increased by more than R300-billion — reaching R145-billion for Medupi and R161.4-billion for Kusile. But Chris Yelland, managing director of EE Publishers, using Eskom’s 2016 financial statements, has previously estimated these costs are “conservatively” closer to R208.7-billion and R239.4-billion for Medupi and Kusile respectively. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.