President Cyril Ramaphosa’s government was meant to sweep out corruption but Finance Minister Tito Mboweni is financing ever more of it, at the cost of worsening climate change, lower-than-promised social grant spending and even tertiary education funding. The main pressures on Mboweni were to fund sufficient electricity supply so that load-shedding ends and to avoid a final junk rating on securities, which Moody’s has been threatening for two years since Standard & Poor’s and Fitch punished the Zuma regime for firing one of Mboweni’s predecessors, Pravin Gordhan. Mboweni may not avoid a Moody’s downgrade, as the deficit-to-gross domestic product (GDP) ratio rises to 4.4%, but taxpayers’ contributions of an extra R23-billion in annual interest payments will keep Eskom’s bankers happy — undeservedly so, given their lending malpractice. A central reason for the fiscal squeeze not mentioned by Mboweni is corporate and tenderpreneur corruption of his outsourcing contracts, which amount to more than R700-billion of the total R1.83-trillion budget. Overcharging on outsourced goods and services, according to former treasury procurement chief Kenneth Brown (who quit his job two years ago because of death threats), represents a 35% to 40% mark-up, or more than R250-billion. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.