Businessman and head of Matome Maponya Holdings (MMI), Kholofelo Maponya wants the Public Investment Corporation (PIC) to fork out more than R45-million in unpaid transaction and origination fees for work MMI conducted on behalf of mortgage lender SA Home Loans and the state asset manager. His demands relate to a loan that was extended by the PIC to SA Home Loans to provide home financing for members of the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF). Maponya is a shareholder of SA Home Loans through his company, MMI. Maponya, who has been named by several witnesses, including former PIC chief executive Dan Matjila and SA Home Loans chief executive Kevin Penwarden at the PIC commission of inquiry, filed court papers in January 2018 demanding that the PIC honour its obligations for services rendered by MMI in the PIC-SA Home Loans transaction. Maponya said that the decision to take the PIC to court over the fees dispute was motivated by his wish to defend himself against “malicious and defamatory” statements against him at the commission. During his testimony at the Mpati commission in May, Penwarden said that he had been informed by Matjila’s executive assistant, Wellington Masekesa, that the PIC would approve of a R10-billion loan to SA Home Loans only if the mortgage lender agreed to pay Maponya R45-million. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.