KwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala wants to begin implementing the recommendations of the Moerane inquiry into political killings in the province within two months. The move, made public by Zikalala at a media briefing last week after his state of the province address, comes at a time when investigations into a number of high-profile political killings in KwaZulu-Natal have gained momentum, with several cases currently before the courts. The commission, chaired by advocate Marumo Moerane SC, was appointed by former premier Willies Mchunu in response to the wave of killings that swept the province ahead of the 2016 local government elections. It delivered its final report to Mchunu in September last year, after hearing months of evidence about the killings, many of which targeted ANC councillors and officials. At the time, Mchunu came under fire from opposition parties and civil society organisations about delays in releasing the report and a failure to make public a full transcript of the evidence presented to it. Zikalala is understood to have commissioned an implementation plan to ensure that the recommendations — which include a shake-up of the tender process and an end to political deployment in council posts — are not ignored and play a role in decreasing potential political tensions ahead of the 2021 local government elections. Zikalala told journalists the implementation plan was being finalised before being endorsed by the Cabinet and tabled in the provincial legislature. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.