The Economic Freedom Fighters (EFF) have once again entered the fray in support of the public protector, this time in the legal stand-off between Busisiwe Mkhwebane and Cyril Ramaphosa. An urgent court case, to be heard on Tuesday in the Pretoria high court, was brought by Ramaphosa after an increasingly heated exchange of correspondence with the public protector. At its heart are their respective positions on whether or not he has implemented the remedial action that she directed in her report into the early pension payout of former South African Revenue Service (Sars) deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay. In her report, Mkhwebane found that Gordhan’s approval of the early payment of Pillay’s pension, with full benefits, was irregular and directed Ramaphosa to take note of her findings and take appropriate disciplinary action against Gordhan. Gordhan, however, has taken the case to court on review, prompting the president to await its outcome before taking disciplinary steps. Ramaphosa said he believed he had complied with Mkhwebane’s order because he had indeed taken note of the findings in this report — as directed. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.