Democratic Alliance leader Mmusi Maimane believes laying a complaint with the public protector’s office against President Cyril Ramaphosa was the right thing to do. It is his grievance over a R500 000 donation by utilities company African Global Operations, formerly known as Bosasa, to Ramaphosa’s ANC presidential campaign that has raised the political temperature to its current nearly untenable state. The president came into power on a ticket of clean governance and a zero-tolerance approach to corruption. Since then, Bosasa’s alleged role in state capture has been laid bare at the Zondo commission. There are also allegations Ramaphosa’s son Andile benefited from Bosasa contracts after he won the ANC presidency. After Maimane’s grievance, Mkhwebane found that Ramaphosa violated the executive ethics code by not disclosing campaign fund contributions while he was still deputy president and an MP. The public protector’s report also detailed a campaign war chest of hundreds of millions of rands for the then presidential hopeful. Ramaphosa has taken the report on judicial review, but damage to his anti-corruption stance has already been done. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.