Sugar and property giant Tongaat Hulett is considering laying criminal charges against its former chief executive, Peter Staude, over the accounting scandal that has sent its share price into free fall and that may result in up to 5 000 workers losing their jobs. The company has declined to name the “former executive” against whom it laid charges last month, but three sources with knowledge of the matter have confirmed that Staude, who retired last year after 16 years as chief executive, is said to be next in the firing line. Staude, who received R94-million in bonuses and incentives over the past 10 years, had spent 40 years with the group. Tongaat Hulett spokesperson Michelle Jean-Louis this week declined to comment beyond confirming that charges had been laid against a former executive, saying that the move was a result of a forensic audit into accounting practices. The company has also confirmed that a “headcount reduction” will take place as part of a plan to turn the company around, but has been unable to say how many jobs will be lost. But it has issued retrenchment notices in terms of Section 189 of the Labour Relations Act to a total of 5 000 workers. Jean-Louis said Tongaat was “reviewing, and reducing, our headcount as part of the broader restructuring of the business to ensure that the company has the right skills and experience to implement our new operating approach”. Jean-Louis said the exact number of jobs lost would only be known when “the restructuring process is further progressed”. She said the company had notified all the trade unions represented at the business in South Africa about the retrenchments, which would also affect its operations in six Southern African Development Community countries, which were based on “operational requirements”. She also confirmed that the company was considering selling off some of its assets as part of a turn-around plan that is being implemented. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.