Thirty-one years ago, Salim Abdool Karim told his wife that he wanted to become a fellow of the Royal Society. This was after he was blown away by a presentation made by his lecturer about the Royal Society while Karim was studying at the London School of Economics. Now an expert in HIV prevention and treatment, he says one of the things the lecturer spoke about then was that when you become a fellow of the Royal Society you drop all the qualifications after your name and simply write “FRS” (Fellow of the Royal Society). “When you write FRS nobody would want to bother you with what your qualifications are, because that is more valuable than any qualification. I was fascinated by that idea,” he says. Last Friday, in London, Professor Karim’s long-held dream came true when he was inducted as a fellow of the 359-year-old Royal Society. The society is a fellowship of the world’s most eminent scientists and is the oldest scientific academy with a mission to recognise, promote, and support excellence in science. According to its website, it has about 1 600 fellows, and each year about 52 fellows are elected from a group of around 700 candidates. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.