Embattled former Public Investment Corporation (PIC) chief executive Daniel “Dr Dan” Matjila has for the past two weeks been in the hot seat at the inquiry probing alleged impropriety and the failures of governance at the corporation. More than 70 witnesses have appeared before the commission, giving evidence on how the state asset manager, which manages R2-trillion in funds, mostly from the Government Employees Pension Fund (GEPF) and the Unemployment Insurance Fund (UIF) became involved in controversial transactions with companies including VBS Mutual Bank, Total SA and three companies linked to businessman Iqbal Survé — Ayo Technology Solutions, Independent Media and Sagarmatha. Matjila, who stepped down in December 2018, has been presented as an authoritarian figure. For example, a senior market analyst at the PIC, Tshifhango Ndadza, told the commission in May that “Dr Dan did not lead, he ruled over the PIC”. The Dr Dan character, however,  does not fit the stereotype of a dictatorial leader who ruled with an iron fist, undermined staff and unilaterally signed off on investments connected to his friends. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.