There have been ululations in the market about the fact that food and beverage giant PepsiCo wants to invest in South Africa through a R24-billion offer to buy JSE-listed Pioneer Foods, but concerns are also being raised about the investment in a sector that is highly concentrated. Local and international agencies, including the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), have expressed worry about the high degree of concentration in some sectors of the South African economy. The government now has a new tool in the Competition Amendment Act, passed in February this year, which allows it to tackle concentrated sectors by enabling the entry of smaller businesses. President Cyril Ramaphosa, speaking this week at a conference at the University of Johannesburg, said the IMF and World Bank had found that a key economic problem in South Africa is the dominance of monopolies. “They have a stranglehold on the economy … That was what was designed in the past and it was so designed that it ensured that there were a few insiders. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.