The ANC in Parliament says the motion to remove public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane from office will not be discussed in caucus before the matter has been dealt with in Parliament’s justice portfolio committee. This comes as the Democratic Alliance intensifies its calls that Mkhwebane is unfit for office and should be removed from her position by MPs. In May, the official opposition called on National Assembly speaker Thandi Modise to hold an inquiry into whether Mkhwebane should continue as public protector. At the time, the DA’s chief whip, John Steenhuisen, said she was not the right person for the job. “She has demonstrated an appallingly poor understanding of both the law, as well as of her own powers, and has proven that she is not able to act independently,” he seed. Modise’s quick response in referring the matter to the justice committee left some believing Mkhwebane’s removal was imminent. But fissures in the facade of unity in the majority party indicate that not all ANC MPs are on board in removing Mkhwebane. The DA’s leader, Mmusi Maimane, told the Mail & Guardian that some MPs in the ANC want to take the matter forward themselves and remove Mkhwebane on the majority party’s own terms. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.