With his department’s focus shifted towards job creation, Employment and Labour Minister Thulas Nxesi says he will not risk sidelining worker’s rights to create more work. “There are some who argue that an any jobs [approach] — which yields more jobs — is better than the decent jobs we are striving for,” Nxesi told the Mail & Guardian, which caught up with the minister this week during a break in his busy schedule. “As South Africans, we are not going back to those dark days — certainly not under the watch of this government,” he said. One of the biggest hurdles Nxesi faces in his tenure as minister is to balance the sixth democratic administration’s plans to create jobs with the department’s mandate to protect workers from exploitation by championing their rights and regulating the labour market. In the department’s budget vote speech earlier this month, Nxesi emphasised that realising its new mandate would require co-operation with other government departments and the private sector, which it depends on to “propel employment”. Nxesi dismissed speculation that the department would have trouble reining in the private sector through regulations when it depends on the sector to drive employment. Instead, he argued that a vigilant department that works closely with organised labour and the private sector will help to stabilise the labour market and drive job creation. In his budget vote speech, Nxesi said the department will leverage the Unemployment Insurance Fund and the Compensation Fund, which compensates workers who lose their ability to work, “to preserve jobs and to invest in job-creating initiatives”. He also announced that the department hopes to drive employment by offering hiring subsidies to private-sector employers. Nxesi told the M&G that there is “no contradiction” in the department’s mandate to protect workers’ rights and its efforts to engage with the private sector on job creation. “We are government, and as government, we have to speak to everybody … We must be able to bring the social partners together,” he said. “Because, in reality, government can only create jobs to a certain extent. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.