King Goodwill Zwelithini is gearing up to join South Africa’s “green revolution”, with plans already under way to grow cannabis for medicinal purposes on land in KwaZulu-Natal under his control. Go Life International, a listed company that manufactures health supplements, has been in talks with the Ingonyama Trust Board since last year to grow cannabis on a 75-hectare stretch of trust land on the North Coast. The trust has approached consultants in the cannabis industry with a view to them training people living in the area to grow and process cannabis for the medicinal and recreational markets. Last month Zwelithini told the opening of the KwaZulu-Natal provincial legislature that the time had come for people in the province’s rural areas to start investigating growing and processing cannabis for medicinal products. He called on government and the farming community to recognise the economic potential of cannabis now that its personal use had been decriminalised, and to take a “very close look” at the industry as a means of fighting unemployment and poverty in the province. Ahmed Jamaloodeen, treasurer of the Cannabis Development Council of South Africa, said that all measures to place cannabis within the mainstream of the economy should be encouraged. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.