Thursday. It’s a blissful Durban morning, all soft light and summery temperatures, a superb end to what turned out to be a rough first week back at work. The two-edition lay-off was a thing of great beauty, which ended far too quickly; the rhythm of doing as little as possible broken, just as it was getting comfortable, by the dreaded and inevitable return to work. Part of the holiday was spent in Port Edward where, thankfully, the freshly reinstated water supply appears to be holding out, despite the increased demand created by the school holidays. A week before schools closed, the Port Edward area had been dry as a bone, the desperation apparent on the faces of the local people, 175 000 of whom had been forced to share borehole water with livestock or wait for it to be trucked in for three months. Last week, the roads around the KwaZulu-Natal South Coast town were no longer punctuated with water containers left out by residents hoping to catch the “waterkan” on its rounds. The taps were no longer dry — or spewing brown water drawn directly from the Umtamvuna River in the case of the Banners Rest area — after pumps that had broken down were eventually repaired by the Ugu district municipality. Life had returned to normal. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.