Government has turned the screws on the embattled Housing Development Agency (HDA), delaying the transfer of its funding for 2019 on the grounds that it would be “remiss and reckless” to do this before a raft of issues are resolved. The agency, which was placed under administration last year after sexual and governance scandals, was told it would only get the money it needs to operate if it cleaned up its act and showed that it could deliver on its mandate. Last month, the human settlements and water ministry placed the HDA on notice, saying that it needed to explain why it was using hundreds of millions of rands meant for operations to pay salaries. The ministry said the first tranche of the HDA’s funding for 2019 would only be released if it could prove that the funding would be prudently spent. The delay in granting funding to the agency — which procures and prepares land for low-cost housing projects at provincial and municipal level — will negatively affect President Cyril Ramaphosa’s plan to accelerate low-cost housing delivery, which he announced in his state of the nation address earlier this year. On June 6, human settlements director general Mbulelo Tshangana wrote to HDA acting chief executive officer Sibongile Mpofu, informing her that the application for a draw-down on its first operational grant for 2019 would not be made until certain conditions were met. In the letter, which Mail & Guardian has seen, Tshangana said it would be “remiss and reckless” to transfer any funding to the HDA “without the necessary satisfaction that it would be applied in a responsible, prudent, compliant and developmental manner”. Tshangana said that, because of the “litany of issues requiring attention, clarity, response and information”, an urgent meeting needed to be held between the HDA and the department. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.