Although the tenants and Transnet are mum on the legality of their stay at the old Durban International Airport, a slew of forensic investigations into Transnet Properties begin to paint a picture into how all this was done and who is responsible. Over the course of the year, the Mail & Guardian has seen four different reports detailing alleged acts of corruption and poor processes into several deals involving various high-value properties under the Transnet property stable. So far, implicated parties include Transnet Property chief executive Zakhele “Thabo” Lebelo, who resigned in the face of disciplinary action, chief operations officer Phutego Dikgole and regional officials Linda Nodada, Natasha Davids and Iris Lawrence. Alleged shenanigans in the old Durban airport leases are contained in a report done by Ntlangula Attorneys earlier this year and a previous draft report done by Ligwa Advisory Services in February 2017. That was just four months before Transet concluded its lease deal with Seaworld Aviation. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.