After footage went viral of a baby turtle struggling to breathe because a plastic straw was trapped in its nose, it didn’t take people long to denounce plastic straws. But are reusable or collapsible straws the answer? “I think that people are trying to be aware of their effects on the environment and the collapsible straw is a very convenient way to do it,” says Aaliyah Kathrada, founder of Sip Conscious, which “provides an eco-friendly alternative to the sin that is plastic straws”, according to its website. Kathrada launched what she calls a social enterprise in early 2018 “to assist with the conundrum of plastic straws”. Sip Conscious initially sold stainless steel straws — in a range of colours and thicknesses — and, late last year, also began stocking collapsible steel straws. Retailing at R160 each and coming with its own cleaning brush in a keyringed box, Kathrada says sales of collapsible straws have been strong so far. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.