Abdelkader Ouazzani, the last of Morocco’s brocade master weavers, has been repeating the same gestures for 63 years in his dilapidated workshop in the heart of the old city of Fez. “This profession is vanishing …There were many craftsmen in Fez, but they all died and only memories remain,” says the 79-year-old weaver, the last witness of a bygone era. His skilful hands intricately create shimmering silk fabrics enhanced with gold or silver thread for bridal jewellery, designer creations or high-end furnishings. His entire body engages in the delicate job, using a complex drawloom mechanism made up of a large wooden frame topped with beams, rafters, blades, pulleys and counterweights. His feet rest on the wooden pedals, his shoulders are bent forward, his arms move apart with each launch of the wooden shuttle. “It’s all a question of calculation, each thread takes its path: it’s like mathematics,” says the old man. He is secretive about the “rules of the art” which he learned long ago in his youth, when, he says, “there were no industrial machines” to do the job. His work is both physical and meticulous: it takes an entire day to weave a metre of brocade. “Not everybody is allowed to see that. It’s very special. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.