In late February, the 20th to be precise, Finance Minister Tito Mboweni detailed in his budget how R23-billion would be made available for the next three years so that Eskom could get its financial and operational affairs in order. The announcement was generally welcomed as what was expected was a huge bailout of say R100-billion to move some of Eskom’s debt on to government’s balance sheet. The R23-billion-a-year is more on a pay-as-you-go basis for the fiscus, which would also supposedly not let Eskom off the hook, in that the rescue was linked to the appointment of a chief restructuring officer to reconfigure the ailing state enterprise. But within five weeks, at the end of March, the power utility — the 11th largest globally and the country’s biggest enterprise with turnover last year of R177-billion — needed emergency funding to be kept functioning. Parliament, meanwhile, had voted on the day after the budget, February 21, to dissolve, ahead of the May 8 elections. We pick up the story from a document, a report to Parliament, dated April 14, by Mboweni, which begins: “To inform Parliament of the use of funds to defray expenditure of an exceptional nature which could not, without serious prejudice to the public interest, have been postponed to a future parliamentary appropriation of funds.” Mboweni says treasury did not submit a special appropriation Bill for consideration by Parliament as there was no indication that Eskom would experience difficulty in raising the required funding to defray its obligations until the end of the appropriation process. “However, by the end of March 2019, it became evident that Eskom was experiencing difficulties in raising the required funding as well as drawing down existing facilities.” That the utility was in trouble, is evident. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.