The recently praised Political Party Funding Act has significantly affected the fundraising efforts of political parties, with both the ANC and Democratic Alliance (DA) calling for a review of the new law. This week the ANC’s treasurer general, Paul Mashatile, called for the law to be reviewed during the sixth administration. DA chief executive Paul Boughey expressed a similar sentiment when fundraising before the 2019 elections proved difficult, in part because of the new law. The parties experienced difficulties raising funds in the run-up to the general elections billed as the most crucial since 1994, fighting not only a weak economic climate but a toxic business environment, in which the private sector has become entangled in allegations of corruption and state capture. Political party funding has historically been contentious, but the state capture years have perhaps exacerbated this — particularly after the harrowing revelations before the state capture commission of inquiry about donations to the ANC from controversial services company Bosasa. ANC leaders from three provinces have also complained about a shortage of resources such as transport and T-shirts. This week, the ANC in the Western Cape issued a statement saying it was returning a donation by businessman Iqbal Survé — which was publicly made — because the party belatedly realised the donor was implicated in wrongdoing before the Public Investment Corporation commission of inquiry.  Yet in a statement, Survé said there had been no formal communication from the party in the province indicating that the money would be returned and that he was told the money had already been distributed to regions in the province. President Cyril Ramaphosa signed the Bill into law in January, despite misgivings among the larger parties. At the time, the ANC welcomed the move: “The ANC has consistently supported the principle of regulating funding for political parties. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.