The government seems determined to push ahead with a controversial strategic fuel reserves project in eThekwini, KwaZulu-Natal, despite concerns about irregularities and advice against doing so. The project involves leasing land owned by state utility Transnet in Ambrose Park, near the Durban Port, where the government hopes to develop a strategic new fuel-storage facility. Energy Minister Jeff Radebe, who this week committed South Africa to a R14.5-billion oil exploration and production deal in South Sudan, was accused of pushing KwaZulu-Natal Premier Willies Mchunu to launch the project. This is despite the Central Energy Fund (CEF) advising against the structure of the deal, and state utility Transnet — the owner of the land and terminals — sounding the alarm about the lease agreements to the private entities that will take part in the project. But Radebe rubbished these accusations, saying he was merely responding to an invitation, by Mchunu’s office, to launch the project. He said his department’s involvement in the project was as a facilitator and not as the lead. The proposed development will create storage capacity for 1.3-billion litres of refined fuel. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.