There are very few certainties in the upcoming general election except that it promises to be one for the record books. And as political parties wrap what has been an uncharacteristically dull campaign season, the mood likely dampened by power outages, a series of fuel price hikes and the creeping cold of winter, the focus now shifts to pulling off the immense logistical feat which has come to characterise the South African election. At the opening of the results centre in Pretoria, Sy Mamabolo, chief electoral officer of the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC), put forward some staggering numbers: 26.7-million voters, 22 924 voting stations, 189 000 volunteers and more than 60-million national and provincial printed and distributed ballot papers. These will go into 300 000 ballot boxes with voting conducted at 45 000 voting booths. Although political temperatures are high, there have been few violent incidents in the run-up to the polls. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.