Teacher unions want whoever is going to be appointed as minister of basic education to urgently deal with the problems of school infrastructure, which they say has crushed the dignity of their members. The South African Democratic Teachers Union (Sadtu) has even threatened to take the new minister to court if that person does not address the problem. Speaking to the Mail & Guardian this week — in anticipation of a new Cabinet to be announced after the inauguration of President Cyril Ramaphosa on Saturday — the three biggest teacher unions said that, although they appreciated the work done by Angie Motshekga in her 10 years in the post, they believe it is time to bring in someone with fresh ideas to deal with the many problems in the sector. Sadtu, the National Professional Teachers’ Organisation of South Africa (Naptosa) and the National Teachers Union (Natu) agreed that the prime concern was the poor facilities in schools. Sadtu general secretary Mugwena Maluleke said that whoever is appointed has to restore the dignity of teachers by addressing inadequate infrastructure. He said the union has been “too nice” while its members have been humiliated and now it is ready to fight. “This is a dignity issue. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.