The treasury is sticking to its guns over a change to tax laws that will see certain South Africans living and working overseas paying more tax despite continued opposition from expatriates. At the heart of expat concerns is an amendment to an exemption from paying tax on income earned outside South Africa. They hope to petition Parliament this year to get it to re-examine the change. Initially the treasury proposed removing the exemption entirely, but, after deliberations and hearings were held in 2017, the treasury agreed to a formulation that would see expatriates exempt from paying personal income tax up to the equivalent of R1-million, after which they will pay tax at the relevant marginal rate. The change in the law — dubbed the “expat tax” although it is not an actual tax — will come into effect on March 1 2020. Hilary Dudley, the managing director of Citadel Fiduciary, argued that the amendment is fair, considering the tax thresholds people who pay tax in South Africa are subject to, especially if individuals who are working abroad but pay no direct taxes, still have families in South Africa and consider the country home. “The context is that this is the general trend in South Africa and around the world to tighten a tax loophole and ensure that people are treated the same from a tax point of view,” said Dudley. South Africans earning between R708 311 and R1.5-million are taxed at a rate of 41% and those earning more than R1.5-million at a rate of 45%. The treasury said that, like South Africa, most countries follow a residence-based tax system, where individuals are taxed on their worldwide income. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.