A Bentley Bentayga retailing for about R4‑million and the renovation of a private home are at the centre of a battle over who gets to run the Eastern Cape. Whats­App messages, seen by the Mail & Guardian, seem to indicate that the province’s ANC chair and premier candidate, Oscar Mabuyane, is implicated in receiving undue benefits, an allegation he denies. The claims provide insight into the political machinations of a province where Cyril Ramaphosa drew crucial support ahead of the 2017 national elective conference at Nasrec. Mabuyane and party treasurer Babalo Madikizela, seen as allies of Ramaphosa, have been accused of benefiting from payments made to businessman Lonwabo Bam by the Mbizana local municipality, but Bam’s plant hire company, Mthombeni Projects, had not done the work for which he was paid. In the WhatsApp messages between Bam and Madikizela, who has been the human settlements MEC since November, Madikizela provides the banking details of LSM Distributors Randburg for the purchase of a Bentley Bentayga. The banking details of an East London draftsman, Allan Morran, who revamped Mabuyane’s house, are also provided. Mabuyane and Madikizela came to power in a fiercely contested provincial conference in 2017, where ANC members beat each other up and threw chairs at each other. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.