The Tourism Amendment Bill, which proposes reining in the rise of home-sharing apps such as Airbnb, has received backlash from opponents, who argue that the government should let market forces control the short-term home rentals market instead of regulating it. But the tourism department said the Bill will allow the existing regulatory framework to deal with technological disruption and the “challenges” that come with it — such as unfair competition, a shortage of rental stock and displacement of the poor in cities — and will ensure that all players adhere to the same set of rules. The Bill, which has been dubbed the Airbnb Bill, was published in early April. It proposes that small business owners using Airbnb or other home-sharing apps be subject to the same regulations applied to formal establishments such as hotels and guesthouses.  The Bill will, among other things, create a threshold for short-term rentals that will include limits on how long a guesthouse can operate without registering as an official business and the number of nights a guest can stay in a specific establishment. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.