Never one to mince his words, this is what Pravin Gordhan had to say under oath about the way court judgments have evaluated the work of public protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane: “I believe they show an emerging and consistent pattern of disregard for the constitutional mandate of the office of the public protector … and a stunning incompetence, irrationality and negligence on her part in the performance of her duties.” Gordhan is the latest to challenge Mkhwebane’s findings in court, filing papers on Wednesday saying that her report, finding that he had acted unconstitutionally, was politically motivated and “riddled” with errors. The report related to the approval by Gordhan — who was finance minister at the time — of an early retirement for former South African Revenue Services (Sars) deputy commissioner Ivan Pillay on full benefits and for Sars to cover the cost of the resulting actuarial shortfall. Gordhan further approved a request to then keep Pillay on at Sars, but on a fixed-term contract. Mkhwebane directed President Cyril Ramaphosa to take disciplinary action against Gordhan and for Sars to recover the shortfall money that was paid on Pillay’s behalf. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.