For decades the office of the labour registrar had been largely overlooked. But in recent years the registrar, who is tasked with ensuring that trade unions comply with the law, has been thrust into the centre of the political tug of war between government and organised labour. Lehlohonolo Molefe, who was appointed labour registrar last year after a lengthy dispute between his predecessor and outgoing labour minister Mildred Oliphant told the Mail & Guardian this week that more than 100 unions have been sent letters by his office since his appointment in May last year. The letters are warning shots, indicating noncompliance with the Labour Relations Act (LRA) and instructing unions to address this. The registrar can place organisations — including trade unions, employers’ organisations and bargaining councils — under administration and deregister them if they fail to comply with their constitutions and the parts of the Labour Relations Act that govern them. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.