The battle of the banks continued this week when African Bank launched its zero monthly fee account, becoming the third bank to do so. The new banks entering the market with competitive banking fees and interest rates — TymeBank, Bank Zero and Discovery Bank — have sparked a banking war, with consumers reaping the benefits. African Bank’s new digital product offers low fees and competitive interest rates in an increasing cutthroat climate that is set to improve South Africans’ access to quality services. The bank was in tatters five years ago, but has recovered to become one of the trendsetters of 2019. African Bank’s offering of interest of 5.5% a year on money in a transactional account is the highest, and clients will receive 6.5% interest from the savings account. The transactional account is current; the savings account requires one month’s notice. Until this year Capitec was South Africa’s low-fee king, not only offering a low banking tariff, but also a high interest rate. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.