Seventeen months after Steinhoff’s market value went up in a cloud of suspicious accounting, the company finally released its restated 2017 financials this week. And, although the belated report provided greater clarity on the financial hole left under the watch of former chief executive Markus Jooste, it is still not clear how the company will survive, or when anyone will be criminally charged for the chicanery that led to its collapse. The police’s elite investigative unit, the Hawks, confirmed this week that it had still not been granted access to the full PwC forensic report that Steinhoff commissioned in December 2017, after auditors Deloitte refused to sign off on its financial statements because of suspected accounting fraud. Hawks spokesperson Brigadier Hangwani Mulaudzi said: “Discussions are under way to find an amicable solution [to] the matter.”He added that Steinhoff had thus far refused to share the full report on the basis of legal privilege. Along with the Hawks’probe, the company faced a range of other legal matters, said Mulaudzi, but he could not give further details. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.