We are told that Eskom needs new investment in coal mines to keep the lights on even while our banks, reading from a different script, are saying “no, no, no”. The ANC’s head of economic transformation, Enoch Godongwana, told Carte Blanche viewers that Nedbank and Standard Bank have said “they are not going to put money in coal any more. To me, that’s an invitation for prescribed assets,” he said in a reference to the party’s investigation as to whether it should force pension funds to invest in developmental projects. Bloomberg reported that Godongwana said the country has 66-billion metric tonnes of coal reserves, while Eskom has said new mines aren’t being opened quickly enough to ensure supply for its power plants. Standard Bank meanwhile faces a resolution tabled by nonprofits Just Share and the Raith Foundation and activist Theo Botha, for consideration at its annual general meeting on May 30, to include climate risk disclosure in its reporting. A 2015 G20 initiative launched the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures to understand how climate change will affect global markets, and what information companies need to disclose to the investment community to assess climate-related risk and opportunity. “Every rand invested by South African banks in new fossil fuels increases climate risk, renders it hard to transition to a low-carbon economy, and exposes the banks to reputational and financial risks,” Just Share says in a memorandum that explains why it wants Standard Bank shareholders to vote in favour of disclosing climate risk. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.