Deteriorating government finances, including through its exposure to fragile parastatals such as Eskom, have been singled out by the Reserve Bank as a key risk to the stability of the local financial sector. Although the Reserve Bank does not assign any overt probability of this risk materialising in the coming year, economists say that if the finances of state-owned entities (SOEs), particularly Eskom, are not addressed immediately the risks to the financial sector could become reality. In its latest financial stability review, released on Wednesday, the Reserve Bank said the “state of government finances, and the sustainability of government debt in particular, remains a risk to the stability of the domestic financial system and is one of the main potential determinants of further sovereign credit rating downgrades”. High levels of government debt could have a negative effect on international investors’ view of South Africa’s creditworthiness, which could result in refinancing difficulties and possibly trigger wider financial system instability, the Reserve Bank said. The likelihood of these risks to the financial system materialising within the next 12 months was “high”, according to the review’s risk assessment matrix, and it classed the resulting potential effect as “high”. It noted that support for the country’s troubled SOEs added to the pressure on the state’s budget, already weighed down by rising government spending and lower revenue collections, which have put pressure on government debt metrics. According to the Reserve Bank, the state’s contingent liabilities, which consist of guarantees to SOEs, independent power producers and public private partnerships, are expected to increase from R879.6‑billion in 2018-2019 to R1.02‑trillion by 2020-2021. Eskom accounts for 55% of the R529.4-billion in guarantees granted to SOEs.  “The high level of the South African government’s contingent liabilities and the high probability of significant amounts of these contingent liabilities materialising as well as Eskom’s current large debt levels pose a threat to public finances and hence South Africa’s sovereign credit rating,” the Reserve Bank said. It said the effects of a deteriorating domestic fiscal position included a sovereign ratings downgrade triggering capital outflows, lower household and corporate income and investment, a protracted period of low economic growth and pressure on financial sector profitability. Despite these elevated risks, the Reserve Bank’s review concluded that the South African financial system could mitigate negative spill­overs and disruptions. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.