Night had almost fallen at the polling station at Isulabasha Primary School in Umdoni local municipality’s Ward 19 on Wednesday, but voting had hardly gotten under way. Only 300 of the more than 1000 voters registered at the station had been able to cast their votes: until 3pm the station was closed because of a blockade by angry residents protesting over their inability to access water, houses and jobs. Isulabasha and a second voting station down the hill at Stick Farm were both closed because of the protests, which began at about 11pm on Tuesday. The two were among 14 voting stations in the province — there were 18 countrywide — at which voting was severely delayed or disrupted by service delivery protests, according to the Electoral Commission of South Africa (IEC). Residents closed the steep road up the hill to Isulabasha — the only access route for vehicles to the polling station — with boulders, trees, burning tyres and plastic water tanks. Police public order units called to the lower South Coast municipality from Port Shepstone were pelted with rocks as they tried to clear the blockades in the road, which were replaced further up and down the road by residents throughout the morning and early afternoon. Umdoni mayor Mondli Chiliza was called to the scene twice to negotiate with residents, who blame the municipality for the failure to provide running water, the awful condition of the roads and a lack of development. Voting eventually began at Isulabasha at around 3pm, with the station and another at Amandawe Primary School also having to cater for voters from Stick Farm, where IEC officials decided not to open the polling station because of the security situation. Inside the voting station, IEC staff were busy processing voters, whose numbers picked up as darkness fell, under the watchful eye of four public order policing members armed with shotguns and wearing body armour and kevlar riot helmets. The situation was tense: the clearly nervous presiding officer refused to talk to the Mail & Guardian, only allowing pictures to be taken after the IEC regional manager had intervened telephonically. “It was rough here,” said an IEC official who asked not to be named. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.