Standing under the big tree on the grounds belonging tohis village’s musanda (chief) on the morning of the elections, Khorombi Sadiki slowly beat the flat steel bar hanging from one of the branches with a knobkierrie-shaped piece of iron. Soon a trickle of elders — some dressed in the T-shirts of different political parties — responded and began gradually moving into the homestead on a hillock in Tshitungulwane, one of more than 30 villages in the Vuwani district of Limpopo. About an hour earlier, Sadiki had cast his vote at Ratshikwekwete Secondary School in the village. Many elders went to the dilapidated school building to make their mark. Several young people stood a distance away from the polling station watching proceedings, declaring they would not be voting; lamenting the lack of development in their village. A day earlier, at a packed and incomplete sports stadium in Vyeboom, not far from Tshitungulwane, the Pro-Makhado Demarcation Task Team had repeated its call for people to boycott the elections. This team is leading the resistance to the incorporation of Vuwani into the newly formed Collins Chabane local municipality. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.