For 45 years, the National Arts Festival has watched and captured South Africa’s evolution. From the 1980s’ states of emergency and the first democratic elections all the way through to the #FeesMustFall movement and state capture, creatives have used the festival to mirror events in the country. The university town of Makhanda (previously known as Grahamstown) is transformed when more than 200 000 people attend 2 000-plus events performed over 11 days, which makes it the continent’s largest arts festival, according to the department of arts and culture. But this 45th iteration of the festival, which runs from June 27 to July  7, has to contend with the effect of years of drought in the Eastern Cape. In February, the town’s taps ran dry and the Makana local municipality, in which Makhanda is located, gave the go-ahead for disaster relief nongovernmental organisation (NGO) Gift of the Givers to start drilling boreholes. According to the NGO’s Imtiaz Sooliman, the town experienced a shortfall of 13 megalitres of water a day because of reduced water levels in dams that supply Makhanda, and damage to the water treatment plant’s filters.  This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.