The Democratic Alliance’s unsatisfactory performance in the 2019 general elections reflects its poor governance record in the metros it took control of in the 2016 local government election. Various factors — infighting, ideological confusion, conflicting messages about race and identity, the dramatic change in the electoral environment with the election of Cyril Ramaphosa as ANC president and the departure of Jacob Zuma — contributed to the DA’s decline at the polls. But what is also evident is the DA did not live up to its own promise of better and clean governance in the metros it won in 2016. There are ample examples in Tshwane, Nelson Mandela Bay and Johannesburg of a party out of its depth in governing complex cities. It is not surprising, then, that the electorate did not trust the DA to run the country’s economic heartland, Gauteng, or any other province. An ecstatic Helen Zille declared in 2014 that the DA had “broken the ceiling”, referring to the electoral ceiling the party had historically been confined to. In that election, the DA’s support grew from 17% in 2009 to 22%. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.