A new copyright law is just President Cyril Ramaphosa’s signature away from implementation, but critics are claiming that the legislation, which they see as a capitulation to the interests of tech giants such as Google, could have dire consequences for the creative industries. The Copyright Amendment Act has been passed by the House of Assembly and National Council of Provinces, the latter on March 20 this year, but a coalition against the Bill says that, if it is passed into law, it will result in job losses and may ultimately kill the creative industry. Collen Dlamini, spokesperson for the Coalition for Effective Copyright, says the Bill is a “complex piece of legislation, riven with uncertain terminology, that has been rushed through Parliament thanks to the advocacy and funding of tech giants like Google”. He says the Bill calls for “fair use”, which the coalition believes is unfair for creatives because it will allow their work to be freely used by all comers. He says they are against fair use in the Bill because it does not provide statutory protection for content creators. Dlamini says licensing under the existing law allows for students in institutions of higher learning to copy portions of books, but then institutions are liable for a certain fee per student per year. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.