Allegations of widespread financial mismanagement spanning several years have left the once prestigious South African Municipal Workers’ Union in tatters, and with only dim signs of it being put back together. Once the darling of the left — owing to its early leadership’s outward pursuit of a worker-centred union — Samwu’s reputational harm means the country’s biggest municipal union has reportedly haemorrhaged members. A damning Ernst & Young report, tabled at a Samwu central executive committee (CEC) meeting this week, is the latest in a series of blows. The forensic report, seen by the Mail & Guardian, was commissioned by Sawmu’s former leadership after it became concerned about the rate at which the union’s funds were depleted between 2012 and 2015. Previous allegations were that R176-million was looted from Samwu’s coffers, but the report found the deficit was R88-million. Samwu general secretary Koena Ramotlou said the union’s leadership had adopted the report. The CEC also took a resolution to “restore the union to its former glory”. But the 91-page report paints a bleak picture of the Samwu’s internal systems and its ability to handle its 160 000 members’ money. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.