In 1931 the notorious United States gangster Al Capone was sent to prison for 11 years after he was found guilty of tax evasion. He was released after he spent seven years, six months and 15 days in the infamous prison on Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay and had paid all of his fines and back taxes. Although Capone was allegedly behind criminal activities such as the St Valentine’s Day Massacre, where seven members or associates of the rival Bugs Moran mob were machine-gunned against a garage wall by Capone’s men posing as police, he was ultimately nailed not for murder but for unpaid taxes. With South African prosecutors reeling under the weight of the state capture massacre of our fiscus, could the simple prosecution for the nonpayment of taxes be the quickest way of putting the perpetrators into orange overalls? It was reported at the weekend that the South African Revenue Service (Sars) is investigating ANC big brass named in evidence to the Zondo commission by Bosasa insiders, such as Angelo Agrizzi. The Sunday Times said a crack Sars team is investigating unpaid taxes of R250-million. Among those named in the Zondo testimony are Environmental Affairs Minister Nomvula Mokonyane, ANC MP Vincent Smith, former SAA chairperson and current Jacob Zuma Foundation chairperson Dudu Myeni and former prisons boss Linda Mti. The move gets the approval of Corruption Watch’s David Lewis: “Tax evasion is a principal way of finding out what money has been stolen — and sending the perpetrators to prison. It was made famous through the prosecution of Al Capone, who was guilty of many murders, but it was the surest and quickest way to get him off the streets,” said Lewis. The Sunday Times said that the tax authority had “concluded preliminary investigations that are likely to result in individuals not only being served with hefty bills, but also charged for under-declaration of income, overstated expenses and misrepresentation to Sars”. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.