A fierce exchange between Chief Justice Mogoeng Mogoeng and Chief Magistrate Daniel Thulare on Tuesday exposed tensions between the chief justice and the country’s magistrates, who feel excluded from the judiciary’s governance structures. The war of words at the Judicial Service Commission reflects an ongoing debate about the institutional independence of the judiciary and how well a move for the judiciary to govern itself is being implemented. Thulare, interviewed for appointment as a judge to the high court in Cape Town on Tuesday, was taken to task for having said earlier this year that the Heads of Court — the judiciary’s top governance structure — “meets at the pleasure and invitation of the chief justice” and made key decisions affecting courts without the participation of magistrates. Thularewas president of the national magistrates’ organisation, the Judicial Officers Association of South Africa (Joasa), when he made the statements. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.