Lobby groups who benefit from the status quo in the entertainment and performing arts industries could be the reason the Performers Protection Amendment Bill and the Copyright Amendment Bill have not been signed into law, says actors’ rights group the South African Guild of Actors. Adrian Galley, the vice-chairperson and media liaison for the organisation, said there was legal provision for the president to “apply his mind” with regard to enacting the Bills. International companies, which would have to pay up should South African actors be able to earn royalties from repeated use of their work, were in alliance with organisations that had to account for the collection of artist royalties, but these connections remained largely opaque, Galley said. The Coalition for Effective Copyright, for example — which has argued against “fair use” in the Copyright Amendment Bill, because it does not provide statutory protection for content creators — is a vast lobby group involving players as big as the David Gresham Entertainment Group and artist network groups such as the Visual Arts Network of South Africa The two Bills are interrelated in the sense that the Performers Bill would enable artists to be able to claim royalties for the use of their work — rights that musicians have legally enjoyed for decades — and the Copyright Bill makes provisions for the formation of tribunals that would have oversight over collecting societies. Earlier this week, South African actress Vatiswa Ndara wrote a six-page open letter to the minister of arts and culture, Nathi Mthethwa, detailing the lopsided power dynamics and the resultant poverty actors work and live under. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.