Ongoing retrenchments in the banking sector led the South African Society of Bank Officials (Sasbo) to threaten a countrywide strike last month. But the overall picture may not be as gloomy as it seems. Although one independent evaluation shows that some banks have been shedding jobs, other banks are hiring. In recent months, banks such as Standard and Absa have announced retrenchments, citing the weak economy and redirecting resources towards digitalisation. Sasbo, which claimed that more than 40 000 members would participate in the strike, said it would mean there would be no cash in ATMs. “The whole aim of the strike is to call for the stoppage of retrenchments and job losses,” Sasbo secretary general Joe Kokela said in an interview with eNCA. The day before the intended strike on September 27, the labour court in Braamfontein ruled the strike unlawful. But Stuart Theobald, chairperson at research and consulting firm Intellidex, said the numbers show that overall the sector is simultaneously hiring workers, while retrenching others. He said that this year Standard Bank had cut 2 097 of its 46 168 of employees, Nedbank had shed 937 people, leaving it with 30 335 workers, and Absa pruned its headcount by 1 688 to 39 629. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.