This Wednesday’s breakfast tweet by power utility Eskom that it would be implementing stage 2 load-shedding came 12 months, one day, and a couple of hours after the same announcement last year. That 2018 announcement was followed by another in December, where unplanned breakdowns saw 9 000 megawatts lost to the grid. Four months later, in March this year, Eskom went through unprecedented stage 4 load-shedding. That prompted Public Enterprises Minister Pravin Gordhan, Eskom chairman Jabu Mabuza, then Eskom chief executive officer Phakamani Hadebe, chief operations officer Jan Oberholzer and generation executive Andrew Eztinger in tow — to take media in their confidence in a closed session that laid out the nature of the problems. Their main solution: to revive critical maintenance-monitoring contracts — worth hundreds of millions — that would allow the utility to pre-empt boiler tube leaks, do maintenance, and avoid unplanned outages. Six months later, Oberholzer told talk radio host Eusebius McKaiser that over the weekend Eskom lost 10 500MW of power after six power-generation units were lost because of boiler tube leaks. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.