As President Muhammadu Buhari visits South Africa this week, two Nigerians with dual residence talk to Lester Kiewit about what makes them want to stay in the country that has become their home, and how they navigate an often hostile reception to their identity Charles Ofchukwu has been living in South Africa for more than 20 years. He has a South African wife, and four children born in the country. Ofchukwu is Nigerian, but he says South Africa is home. Members of the Nigerian community in Cape Town have come out to say that despite recent xenophobic tensions — particularly targeting Nigerians living in parts of Johannesburg — they won’t be leaving in a hurry. Nigerian President Muhammadu Buhari is also in Pretoria, on a visit to mend strained relations between two of Africa’s largest economies. President Cyril Ramaphosa has been at pains to apologise to African countries whose citizens have been targeted during the recent violence. But the government has stressed the violence was a result of the economic uncertainty of South Africans, and not anti-migrant sentiment. Ofchukwu, who is the chairperson of the Cape Town-based Nigerian Informal Traders Association, says it is time for African migrants to announce they’re not in South Africa as visitors but as residents and contributors to society and the economy. “It’s awkward that we have to justify why we call South Africa home,” Ofchukwu says. “But I think it is necessary for us to do it. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.