Media boss Iqbal Survé is seldom far from controversy. He now finds his world closing in, with Public Investment Corporation (PIC) executives this week disclosing that it is considering liquidating his media group to realise R1.5-billion it is owed by the Survé-linked Sekunjalo Independent Media. Survé also faces a R4.3-billion claim brought by the PIC to reclaim money it had invested his Ayo Technology Solutions before its listing on the JSE in December 2017. Survé has disputed the suggestion that R1.5-billion is owed to the PIC by Sekunjalo Investment Holdings, saying that the company has never requested a loan from the state-owned asset manager. But industry observers say that while they carry no torch for Survé, the loss of a major media group such as Independent, which has its origins in the 100-year-old Argus company, would have a devastating effect on the country’s media landscape. Independent publishes 20 newspapers and nine digital publications including The Star, the Cape Times and I’solezwe lesiXhosa. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.