A group of senior women lawyers have written to President Cyril Ramaphosa and Justice Minister Ronald Lamola, furious that no senior female advocates were briefed to assist the National Prosecuting Authority (NPA) with its state capture prosecutions. “It is astonishing that not a single senior counsel or practitioner met the criteria for selection. We take umbrage at the suggestion that female silks are not, or cannot, be respected,” said the letter, dated October 18. They have asked for “an urgent dialogue” with the president and the minister about the state’s briefing patterns. The letter followed a report in the Sunday Times on October 13 that four top legal minds — Wim Trengove SC, Hamilton Ngwako Maenetje SC, Geoff Budlender SC and Tembeka Ngcukaitobi — had been briefed to prosecute state capture crimes. Signed by 40 senior women lawyers, the letter said: “There are several female advocates who were conferred the honour of silk many years before their male counterparts, and may we be bold enough to say that the honourable minister of justice must have known this. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.