The ANC is moving to take advantage of the fallout in the Democratic Alliance and seize control of the Johannesburg metro. The party hopes to woo the Inkatha Freedom Party away from its co-operation agreement with the DA and Economic Freedom Fighters, ahead of the vote to replace mayor Herman Mashaba, who resigned from the DA on Monday and will leave office on November 27. The governing party also aims to break the coalition between the DA, EFF and IFP in several rural KwaZulu-Natal municipalities that it lost to the coalition in 2016. To do that, it has offered the IFP mayorships in these towns in return for their dumping the DA. Yesterday, ANC deputy secretary general Jessie Duarte met the leadership of the party’s Gauteng region and its greater Johannesburg region to take stock of the gaps created by Mashaba’s resignation in a bid to try to take back control of the city. This followed provincial and caucus level talks between the ANC and IFP in Gauteng and KwaZulu-Natal in recent weeks, according to sources in both parties. In 2016, the DA took 121 seats in Johannesburg, ahead of the ANC’s 104, with the EFF taking a further 30 seats. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.