Problems with the ANC’s electronic membership system are likely to delay key elective conferences in a number of the party’s provincial and regional structures until next year. The move to a digital system has already delayed preparations for four regional elective conferences and a regional general council meeting in KwaZulu-Natal, including in Durban and Pietermaritzburg. The provincial leadership has asked Luthuli House to allow it to use the old membership system so that the conferences can be held. The migration to the new system — unveiled in August last year by secretary general Ace Magashule — is also understood to be delaying preparations for provincial and regional conferences in Mpumalanga and North West. Both provinces are being run by task teams appointed by the national executive committee (NEC). Cloned ANC branches and ghost members in Mpumalanga were exposed by the Mail & Guardian last year, which led the party to initiate an investigation. This resulted in the collapse of two regions and the merging of parallel branch structures by the provincial task team. Delays in implementing the membership system will also impact on the representation of provinces and regions at the ANC’s mid-term national general council meeting next year. The ANC’s bid to end vote rigging and gatekeeping, practices that dogged the path to the 2017 national conference at Nasrec, may also have been affected. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.