It is sometimes seen as the mini- or medium-term budget — just an update of where we are — but so constrained are the government’s finances at present that Finance Ministers Tito Mboweni’s medium-term budget policy statement on Wednesday will be watched like it is the main event. This is not least because credit rating agency Moody’s, which maintains South Africa at investment grade, will two days later issue its verdict on whether the South Africa will be downgraded to junk. The government will be hoping that the announcement of a fix for Eskom’s finances and the long-awaited appointment of new chief executive for the utility will ward off a credit downgrade. Intellidex’s Peter Attard Montalto predicted the Eskom announcement will be the most important part of the finance minister’s medium-term budget policy statement — “an appendix stuffed at the back”, he said. He suggested the statement will be light on detail regarding the national power utility, given that Eskom’s chief restructuring officer, Freeman Nomvalo, has gone somewhat “rogue”— with treasury appointing Deloitte to advise it on debt solutions. Montalto said the full R13-billion contingency reserve is being spent this year; R11-billion on the bailout of state-owned enterprises (excluding Eskom) and the remainder to partly offset the revenue shortfall. “We then see the contingency reserves for the coming years largely staying unchanged given the risk of further SoE [state-owned entities] bailouts. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.