With the clock ticking down to M-Day — Finance Minister Tito Mboweni’s medium-term budget on October  30 or Moody’s credit rating review on November  1 — at least one high-profile pundit is predicting a downgrade. Investment bank Renaissance, in a view at odds with the majority surveyed by Bloomberg, is predicting we will be junked. The prediction has standing because Renaissance has got the last eight out of nine sovereign ratings decisions in emerging markets correct since May. Renaissance global chief economist Charles Robertson, quoted by Bloomberg, said South Africa’s fundamentals had deteriorated since May, when Moody’s maintained its investment grade rating. Robertson pointed to poor growth, problematic public finances, a subdued commodity outlook, xenophobic rioting and questions about President Cyril Ramaphosa’s ability to implement tough economic reforms because he is constrained by his tenuous hold on a deeply divided ANC, and he faces opposition from union allies who, fearing job losses, oppose privatisation. This assessment, though, may be overreach, based on the way Mboweni’s economic reform document passaged through the highest ANC structures. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.