Democratic Alliance members voting in the October 18 election of a federal executive (fedex) chairperson have a tough choice to make. Four senior DA members are running for the position — former party leader Helen Zille, federal executive chairperson Athol Trollip, deputy (fedex) chairperson Mike Waters and deputy federal executive chairperson Thomas Walters. Zille and Trollip are generally regarded as the real contenders for the position. The two frontrunners have been campaigning in public and private, but Waters and Walters have opted to speak directly to voting delegates. The fedex is the party’s highest decision-making body. It consists of, among others, the party leader, the fedex chairperson, provincial party leaders, the parliamentary chief whip and members of the party’s women, youth and student bodies. The federal council, which has about 160 members, is made up of fedex members, MPs, members of provincial legislatures, local government councillors, provincial party leaders, and up to 24 members who are not public representatives. The federal council develops the policies for the party. This article is only available to Mail & Guardian subscribers at present. Please login or consider subscribing. Visit our FAQs page for more information. Alternatively, check back in a few days when the article becomes freely available. Why can’t I read this article?This article is considered premium content, which is available to subscribers only during the week of publication under the Mail & Guardian’s content embargo system. It’s our way of showing M&G subscribers that we appreciate their support. How does the content embargo system work?
As a reader, you’re able to view content according to the category you fall into: How much does a subscription cost?
Go to M&G subscriptions for our various print and digital subscription offers. How do I share embargoed content on social media?
Premium embargoed content becomes freely available on the Monday after the week of publication, but the link does not change so you can share it immediately or check back on Monday and share it then by clicking on the relevant social media button/s below the story.